.topic 1000

e-Bility and Bookscan are Bookscan PTY LTDs point of sale and inventory management solution for bookshops, music, stationery and other retail or wholesale stores.




Click on the link for details on contacting Bookscan Pty Ltd.

Help files version 6.00.02

.topic 2270
This section will help you with an outline on doing some tasks within e-Bility which may require setups to be done in various locations. This will help with seeing the bigger picture on how a feature in e-Bility works.

	Setup for Pacstream ordering / Invoices (electronic invoices)
	Title Page API searching	
	Downloading Files from the Internet	
	Saving Email Attachments
	Updating e-Bility License Files
	Setup Windows Users Accounts



.topic 2450
The follow steps are applicable for those who are upgrading to a new version of Bookscan.



Files used for Update

In your L:\e-Bilitydownloads\ folder you will need to place the following files;
·	Bookscan6.nn.nn.exe – Bookscan installation file
·	Reports.n.nn.zip – Bookscan report forms (in a zip file if updating the reports as well.)
n = number (these numbers will change)
These files may be emailed or a link given for you to download. To get these contact support (support@bookscan.com.au 1300 766 905 or 02 8999 1195). Click on these links to go to the help pages for Downloading and Saving an attachment from an email.

Updatling Bookscan

The installation of Bookscan will be carried out on each machine; the first machine to do with an upgrade is on the server machine. Users need to ensure Bookscan and e-Comms are closed on all machines, including the server before doing the install.
Open Computer -> L:\ -> e-Bilitydownloads  (Where L:\ is the mapped network drive.)
Run the Bookscan.nn.nn.exe (The newest version, higher numbers are newer) by double clicking on the file.


Click Yes button

Click Next button

Select 'I accept the agreement', then click Next button.

Leave it as the default location (So when installed it will be located at C:\Program Files\Bookscan\ on all computers)
Click the Next button

Click the Next button

Click the Next button (leave the defaults, so it will create a desktop icon)


To continue with the installation click the Install button.


Do not click the Cancel button, allow it to continue.


Click Finish button when done.

Note: When the first copy of the new version of Bookscan is started, it will trigger a structure update to run.  You must allow this to complete before starting Bookscan on another computer as per Post Installation.  Once this has completed, you can update & start Bookscan on all other PCs.


Post Installation - Structure Update / Re-index

As part of a new version, the software will now set up the databases. What this will do is, if the files required to store the information are not there, it will create them, if it is and new fields have been added, it will do so at this time.  Without doing this, the program may not work correctly.
This process will only take place on the first machine to run a new version. It is important that the version not be run on any other machine until the process is complete (as the other computers will not know this is running, and run it themselves, which we don't want.)
The following is an example of what will be displayed somewhere on your desktop, and it will constantly change the text that shows on it.


If you get an update error message, please contact the Help Desk immediately before continuing.
If you are prompted with an error message with a 'Retry' option, try clicking it and seeing if it continues. If you are not, but are prompted with an 'Ignore', try that, note down beforehand what was shown in the little window displayed above, and the error message before doing this. (You will still need to contact help desk)
Once the database files are set up, Bookscan is installed.
The system will then automatically re-index all databases. The re-index window will look like this;


When done, it will display a message indicating that if there were any errors/issues to contact support, click the messages OK button.

If no problems move onto installing Bookscan on the next computer, Bookscan is ready to use on the server.

New Stores – Additional steps
New users once this is done for the first time will be prompted to fill in their stores details. Fill in as much as you can, then click the OK button to save. (The details can be amended later, refer to the help files [F1 key in Bookscan])

Please call the Help Desk at Barcode Solutions on +61 2  9683 6999, facsimile +61 2 9683 6955 or email support@barcode.com.au if you require assistance.


.topic 2280

Setting up your store to Electronic Order / receive invoices

To use the Pacsteam service for electronic ordering, firstly you will need to ensure that you are setup with a Pacstream account. If you do not have one, you will need to contact ECN Group. You can always contact Pacstream at support@pacstream.com.au. Then fill in, step by step the following parts of Bookscan so that when you wish to use it, it is ready to go. You will also need to make sure ECN group and the suppliers you wish to deal with using Pacstream are aware you will be ordering using this method.


Step 1: System Options

From the main menu of Bookscan, go to Utilities-->System Options. On the Licensee tab, complete the SAN field with your san number.   (If you dont know this, contact ECN group as mentioned above)
Click OK button to save the change.

Note: Use of the 'Alternate SAN' field should only be used in consultation with Barcode solutions, as there are special setups that you will need to have done with ECN group.


Step 3: Suppliers

For each supplier that you are going to be using Pacstream to order through, you will need to set each of them up for this. For each one of these suppliers, do the following;

1.   From the main menu of Bookscan open Tables-->Supplier Master
2.   Go to the suppliers record (using the search or by any other means). e.g. UNIT for United Book Distributers	
3.   Open the Address tab. 	
4.   Select 'PACSTREAM' from the EDI drop-down list.	
5.   Enter the suppliers SAN number in the SAN field, e.g. 	9013849
6.   Repeat for each pacstream supplier. 	

Note: If you do not have the supplier correctly setup with the SAN number that they will be using (Some suppliers have 2 SAN numbers, ensure you use the one they do for Electronic invoicing), there can be issues when receiving electronic invoices.

Step 4: e-Comms

e-Comms is the program which is what sends through the electronic orders to Pacstream and also retrieves the electronic invoices back. e-Comms should only be setup on one machine, which typically should be the server (machine that contains the database).

To run e-Comms from the main menu of Bookscan, simply click e-Comms-->e-Comms. To run it..
If this is the first time running it, you will be prompted with a few error messages, dont be alarmed by these are these are just to let you know that e-Comms is not yet setup to run, click OK to both of these messages. If you dont get these prompts, proceed anyway.


1.	From the main menu of e-Comms, click File-->Setup.
2.	On the General Tab, set the Bookscan Path as your database directory (e.g. C:\e-Bilitydata\ ). Set Transfer Interval to appear like: 00:30:00 (HH:MM:SS; this will send/receive every 30 minutes).  Tick the Activity Log box.  No other options should be ticked on this window.   Optionally, if you want e-Comms to start minimised in the System Tray, tick the box labelled Start in Task Bar.
3.  Click on the Connection tab. Set SMTP Server and POP3 Server to your ISP's mail servers, (eg. mail.bigpond.com for Telstra / Bigpond.)
4.  Click on the EDI tab. Fill in your  username (Note: you need to leave the pac/p part of the username, followed by your SAN number. e.g. pac/p123456 ) and password (obtain from ECN group).   The FTP Server field will be prefilled with ftp.pacstream.com.au.
5.  Enter you normal email address in the Store EDI Email Address field.
5.  Click Ok button to save the settings.

This will now have you set up to run e-Comms to facilitate any orders that will be made, and/or electronic invoices ready to be received from suppliers.

Suggestion: If you wish to have e-Comms automatically run when your machine starts (it will start minimised in the bottom right hand corner of windows, next to the clock if you selected this in step 2 above), you will need to add a shortcut. To do this open My Computer. Go to C:\Documents and Settings\ Click on the username folder listed under this that you are logged on as. e.g. 'MainUser' . Then you want to select Start Menu, Programs, then Bookscan. (You will now be in C:\Users\MainUser\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\Start Menu\Programs\Bookscan).
Right click on 'e-Comms.exe' and select the option 'Copy'. Now go to C:\Users\MainUser\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\Start Menu\Programs\Startup and right click again and select 'Paste'


Electronic Ordering of Stock

To create orders and send them through Pacstream, click here to see how to order electronically.

Note: For orders to send, e-Comms must be running and either setup to run automatically or triggered manually, otherwise they wont be sent through to the suppliers.

Electronic Invoice receiving

Electronic Invoices section are for stock coming in from suppliers. The supplier need to be setup to send them out (not all do) and they need to know that you accept them.

When e-Comms is running to send electronic orders it will at the same time download electronic invoices that are waiting to be picked up. To ensure you are setup, ensure you have followed steps 1 to 3 above.

To process electronic orders that are downloaded from Pacstream, click here to see what you need to do.

.topic 2410

Typically when there is a new version, or any file for that matter, (these steps are not file specific unless otherwise instructed by support), we will either email you a link to the new version or you will view it on our website (http://support.barcode.com.au Log in with your email address & password, then go to the Software Downloads page to download), to then be installed.
On the website, click the link of the file you wish to download.
	OR
If emailed as shown below, click on the link(s) also.




It will then display the above (through our website, or a link emailed), click the Save button.


Browse for where we wish to put it; what want to save it in the e-Bilitydownloads folder that was setup in the pre-install instructions. (You could chose to save it somewhere else, such as a USB thumbdrive.)  Select L:\e-Bilitydownloads\ as shown above.


Click the Save button.


It will then show this window, which will start downloading the file to the specified location. When done, the window will close automatically (to stop it automatically closing, uncheck 'Close this dialog box when download completes'. Doing it like this will let you know that it downloaded completely).

You can then go into Computer then navigate to where you saved the files to access them.
In this case, we saved it to L:\e-Bilitydownloads\



.topic 2420

We may at times send email with files for your store. These may be new license files, reports, database files etc. When these are sent in an email, the email downloads to your machine and displays in Outlook or Thunderbird.  To save the file, follow these steps.
Open the email by double clicking on it in your email manager (Outlook) to display the email.


Right click on the attachment file (attached file highlighted in blue above), select the option Save As.


Navigate to the location in which you wish to save it.  In this case we will save it to our L:\e-Bilitydownloads\ folder (as always). You could save it to Documents or Desktop if you wish (but other users will not be able to access the files if you do).
Once you find the location, click the Save button.


.topic 2430

After receiving a new license file from sales/support via email, and then saving the email attachment into a location accessible to other computer (Be it the L:\e-Bilitydownloads\ or a USB memory stick).
On each computer that runs Bookscan, open the location the new license file has been saved (e.g. Computer -> L:\e-Bilitydownloads\ or your USB memory drive once plugged into the PC).




Right click on the file Bookscan.lf, then select the Copy option, icon, or use CTRL-C.  By preference, the license file is saved to your database folder, which can be seen at the top of the Bookscan window.  This means you only have to replace it once for all PCs rather than on each one individually.



Navigate to the location shown, (or if your licenses are local on each PC, the location of C:\Program Files (x86)\Bookscan\ (Or C:\Program Files\Bookscan\ for a 32 bit system.  You can also just type this in the Address field.)



Right click where the files are listed and select Paste option.  When there is an existing license in either location you will be prompted to replace your existing file, click the Replace the file in the destination button.

You must then repeat the process on all other computers running Bookscan, if saving them locally.


.topic 2440

All register computers should have the same User Account and Password for use on the Points of Sale.  This same account must also be created on the server.  On the register computers the account may be a limited account, but on the Server it must be a Power User or Administrator.
To create a new User account, go to [Start Button] -> Control Panel -> Add or remove user accounts






Select Create a new account


In this example I will create the User called "POS". Enter the new Username when prompted.
Then click Create Account button.


Now click Create a password

You will now be back at the User Accounts screen.  Click on the user POS icon/name to select it and you will see the window above.  Select Create a Password option.


Now you need to enter the password you want to use for the account (and enter it a second time to confirm), enter a password hint and click Create Password button.


You will now have a screen showing the password protected account.  Click on the "X" in the top corner to close the window. The account has now been created on this computer with the password set. You can repeat these steps on the other register computers.


.topic 1020

Bookscan provides three methods of handling your ordering:

Minimum stock method
With this method you set a minimum stock level for each product in your database.  Draft purchase orders are created at end of day when you Close & Post the days sales and:
·	stock level for a product have fallen below the minimum stock level, or
·	when a special order or backorder is created.
You can manually add a draft order:
·	when creating a new title,
·	in the title master, using a context menu selection,
·	in the Draft Purchase Orders window.
The system will recommend a re-order quantity for each title and you can amend these quantities (and change the supplier) before having the system create your purchase orders.

Sales-based replenishment method
This method uses period sales to trigger re-ordering. Before starting an ordering session, you need to generate draft purchase orders in the Draft Generate window.
Draft purchase orders will be generated for products which have had sales in the nominated period or since the last regeneration depending on your selection. It will also list any special orders or backorders.
You can also manually add titles to the draft.
The system does not recommend a re-order quantity.
You can process your orders in either the Draft Purchase Orders window or the Generated Draft window.

Purchase Order Entry option
The Purchase Order Entry window allows you to create purchase orders without going through the draft purchase order system.

Importing from a csv file
If you have created a list of draft purchase order lines in some other software such as Excel, you can import them into Bookscan. The file should be in csv (comma-separated) format  and must comprise only two columns, ISBN and quantity. Both columns should be text format and if there is a header row, you should remove it. Open the Draft Purchase Orders window and use the right mouse button to open the context menu. Select "Load from csv file", select the file to be imported and the file will load into draft purchase orders.
Some notes:
The program will look up the master file for each product and set the order agianst that product's primary supplier.
If the master record does not have the primary supplier set, the default dummy supplier code ' ~~XX ' will be used. You can then change the order's  in the Draft PO window.
If the product code is not found in the master, the draft order line is not loaded. A log file (DPOImportLog.log) will be created in the same folder  as the csv file. This will list the products (and quantites) that could not be loaded.

.topic 1030

Minimum stock levels
The default minimum stock level is set on the Titles tab of System Options. When adding new products to the title master, the minimum order field will display this default level. The default level will also be set when importing products using the Import Title window and when importing direct from a web site.

Draft Purchase Orders window
The Draft Purchase Orders window can be opened from the main menu: Purchasing/Draft Order/Add/Change.
When you open the window, the drafts will be filtered by the first supplier, sorted alphabetically, to have orders in the draft. To view different suppliers, select them from the Supplier combo box.
Shortcut
If you have the browser filtered by supplier, you can navigate quickly to other suppliers that have draft orders, using the arrow buttons on either side of the supplier combo box.



Unfiltered view
To remove the supplier filter, untick the Supplier Filter (F6) checkbox; the browser will display all draft titles. Now as you click different lines in the browser, the Supplier combo box will display the supplier of the currently highlighted draft order.
To reset the filter either:
·	tick the Supplier Filter (F6) checkbox. The browser will filter to the supplier in the Supplier combo box,
·	select a new supplier in the Supplier combo box.

Supplier details
The currently selected supplier's details are displayed in the left, top of the screen.
The supplier's setting for EDI ordering is displayed in ared box next the supplier's name. The options are:
·	Pacstream – uses the Pacstream service to transmit orders,
·	Email – orders will be emailed to the supplier,
·	No EDI – you will have to print and fax or post the order.

Browser
The browser displays either all the draft orders or just those for the currently selected supplier.
The browser lines are displayed in alphabetical order either by title or by author, depending on which option has been selected in the Purchasing tab of System Options.
Shortcut
If you right click on the browser and select Skip to Author/Title, a window will open where you can enter the title or author you require. Just enter the first few letters of your search e.g. 'Harry' or 'Rowl', and then click the OK button. The browser cursor will then move to the selected title/author.

Browser options
Put a title on hold
Putting a title on hold marks it as not to be included on the purchase order. You can do this by double clicking in the Hold column on the browser.

Delete a draft order line.
Highlight the lines in the browser you wish to delete, open the context menu (right click on the window) and select Delete from the drop down menu.

Filter the draft orders by origin
Products can appear on the draft from a variety of Origins.
To filter titles by their source, click on the Refined Filter (F9) button or open the context menu then select 'Filter by source'. Click on the filter you require and click OK.



Source codes include:
·	Sp	Special
·	Bi	Bisac files
·	Bo	Routed from purchase order
·	Re	Regenerated
·	In	Invoice backorders
·	Te	Academic module
·	Op	Operator
·	PO	Entered via the Purchase Order entry window.
Other non source code filter items are:
·	Non-specials only
·	No academic titles
·	Filter by imprint
·	Only titles on hold
·	Only unheld titles
·	Lift filter

Change Supplier
To change the supplier you wish to order from, highlight the Lines in the browser you wish to move to a new supplier. Click on the Swap Supplier (F7) button. A pop up window will open where you can select the new supplier. Click one of the save buttons or press the Enter key to complete the move.

Department ordering
You can also prepare your purchase orders by department although you will need to switch back to supplier mode to finalise them.
·	Right click on the window to open the context menu and select Department ordering.
·	The supplier drop-down box will change to listing all the departments, with the first department automatically selected.
·	Select the department you require; the browser will display on lines for products from that department.
·	Process each line just the same as you would for ordering by supplier. All the filtering options also work the same way.

Draft Purchase Orders: Edit window
You can examine each draft order line in detail. Highlight a line in the browser and click on the Edit button (or just double click on the line) to go into detailed view.
For a more detailed view, click on a title and then the Edit button (or double click on the title) to go into detail view.



Here you can amend the following fields:
·	Change the order quantity.
·	Add purchase order comments which will appear on the purchase order against that line.
·	Change the minimum and maximum stock levels.
·	Place the draft order on Hold.
·	Mark the draft order as a consignment order (consignment module only)
·	Change the title's status.
·	Change the titles master comment.
·	Change the title to a firm.

Browsers
Receiving History browser
The receiving history window displays each time the title was received into stock, transferred to another store, returned to supplier or made into a kit.

Sales History browser
The sales history window displays the individual sales history of the title including when and to whom, the quantity and the sale price.

Branch Stock browser
Multi-store users can view the stock figures at other branches. Click on the Show Branch Stock (F8) button.

Navigation and saving changes
Use the Save & Next (F12) and Save & Previous (F9) buttons to scroll through the titles, saving your changes as you go.
Use Save To Browser (F11) button to save your changes and return to the list view.

Finalising a draft purchase order
When your draft order is ready to be finalised, make sure you have the supplier selected in the Draft Purchase Orders window.
Click the Finalise (F12) button to open the Finalise PO window.



This window will show you all the product lines that will be ordered if you finalise the order for this supplier now – i.e. any lines from the Draft PO list that have a non-zero order quantity and are not on hold.

SAN
Note: this field will only be displayed if you have set up an alternate SAN number in System options .It does not affect most users,
Bookscan caters for you trading using two SAN numbers (i.e. you will have two accounts with some of your suppliers, one for each SAN). You can set the two SANs on the Licensee tab of System Options. With two SAN numbers set, the Finalise PO window will display a drop down box where you can select which of your SANs to use on the current purchase order.

PO Number
The PO sequence field shows default purchase order sequence (you can have up to five set in the Purchasing tab of System Options.
The Next PO# field shows the next available purchase order number.

Budget Month
If you are using the budgeting module, you can change the effective month of the order in the Budget Month box.

Special instructions
This is where you can enter instructions to appear on the purchase order.
You have three options:
Select from a list of existing instructions
·	In the Special Instructions drop-down list select the required instruction.
Create a new instruction by editing an existing instruction
·	Select an instruction from the drop-down list.
·	Click on the Edit button. This will open the Add field for editing.
·	Amend the Add field as required.
·	When the order is finalised the new instruction will be saved for future use.
·	Note that the existing instruction will not be overwritten - you will just create a new one.
Add a new instruction
·	Type a new instruction in the Add field(such as Backorder if out of stock) that you want to appear on the order.
·	When the order is finalised the new instruction will be saved for future use.

Delete an instruction
	Select the instruction you want to delete from the drop down list
	Right click in the window, a context menu will apprear with the options Delete PO Instruction & Save Instructions.
	Click Delete PO Instruction & then click YES in the Confirmation dialog box that pops up.

Options
·	The Replace checkbox causes to PO instructions hard coded on the PO form, as opposed to adding to these instructions.
·	The Large Font checkbox causes the instructions to be printed in a larger font. Only use this for short messages such as "URGENT", otherwise the full message will not display.
·	The backorder instructions are pre-set instructions to the supplier on how to handle your backorders. The selected instruction will print on the purchase order form.

Totals
The total box displays the following:
·	Lines - the number of lines (products) that will be ordered for this supplier
·	Qty - the quantity of products being ordered.
·	Value - the total cost for the order (you need to take into account that products may have no cost in the title master)
·	Supp min - the supplier minimum order level.

Print Options
·	EDI Orders - if the supplier is setup as an electronic order supplier, this option will be checked. If the supplier is setup as a Pacsteam supplier, this flag will be automatically set. You can, untick the option if you wish to fax/telephone the order instead.
·	Print EDI Orders - if you wish for the electronic orders to print, you can also check this option (it will send electronically, but also print)
·	Copies - if you are printing the order you can select the number of copies to print
·	Print preview – preview the purchase order form on the screen before printing it.
·	Batch Print - this option will cause the purchase order forms to print at the end of processing (when you select the 'Finalise and Close' button) instead of printing the orders as you finalise them.

Purchase order creation
After you have checked your order in the browser and made any changes to the purchase orders settings, you can create the purchase order.
Note - if you notice that expected lines are missing from the browser, click the Cancel button to return to the Draft PO window. Check to see if those products have a zero order quantity or are set as 'hold'.

To finalise the single order, click Finalise & Close (F12).
If you wish to finalise multiple orders, click Finalise & Next (F11).
If you wish to skip to a different supplier, use the Back (F8) or Skip (F9) buttons.

If you wish to process (finalise) all suppliers orders, check the option ' Process All' and then click one of the finalise buttons.




.topic 2210

Using the sales based replenishment method, draft orders are generated in three ways:
·	As special orders and backorders are generated, a draft order for the item is immediately created.
·	Draft purchase orders can be created manually in the title master, draft purchase order window and when creating a new title.
·	In the Draft Purchase Orders Generate window, you can batch create draft orders based on sales over a specified period or on sales since you last generated drafts. These draft orders have a zero re-order quantity. You will need to allocate a quantity against each line while processing it.

After generating draft purchase orders in the DPO Generate window, you have a choice of processing them in the Draft Purchase Orders window or in the Generated Draft window. See below for details.

Draft Purchase Orders Generate window
In this window you can generate a list of products that have had sales in a nominated period. Open the window from the main menu: Purchasing/Draft Order/Regenerate.



There are two date range options:

Sales by date range
You would only use this option occasionally. It creates draft orders for each product sold between the dates selected. You would use this option for say, looking at what you sold leading up to last Christmas or last Father's Day.

Sales since last review
This is the option you would use regularly for your re-ordering. It will generate a list of products sold since the last review date. The default date and time is set to the last time the Regeneration was run. You can change this setting if you wish.

With both options, the system will generate sales and stock movement data for the last 13 months for each item with sales in the nominated date range.

WARNING - When you regenerate draft orders using the data range you will overwrite the draft orders with origins of Sa and Av.

Draft Purchase Order window
You can now use the draft purchase orders window in the same way as for the minimum order method, although the data displayed in the edit window is slightly different.

Note: the order quantity is set at zero for sales-generated draft orders. You will need to enter an order quantity for each line you wish to order.
.
For products where sales and stock movement data have been generated via the DPO Generate window, the edit window will display a browser showing a summary of the sales and stock movements over the last 12 months.



Clicking on the Show by Month button pressing the F7 key will toggle through the four different displays:
Stock movement summary
Sales by month
Sales for the last 14 days
Sales history
Clicking on the first column header in the browser will return to the original view.
The diagram below shows the view of sales and stock movements for each of the last 13 months.



Finalising a draft purchase order
Finalise your orders in the same way as outlined for the minimum order method.


Generated draft window
This window is an alternate way for processing your draft orders. While it gives much less data to work with, it is faster and simpler.
The window displays all draft orders generated using the DPO Generation window. Special order lines will show in this window also. They will appear as a white line (with a quantity already entered) when 'Show only zero order quantity (F6)' is not checked.

After running the regeneration, open the Generated Draft window from the main menu: Purchasing/Draft/Generate Draft.



The lines showing in Yellow are the lines that have not been reviewed (and still have a value of 0 in the Qty Ord field).

Note: Lines entered manually in the DPO window will not show here but will be included when you create the purchase order.

Reviewing the List
To review the list, start at the top.
·	Click in the Qty Ord field, so it highlights the value.
·	Key the value you wish to order.
·	Press the Enter key on the keyboard, which then moves to the next line.
·	If you do not wish to order a line, when you come to it, you can click the Delete Line (F5) button, or use the F5 key on your keyboard, which will then move on to the next line.

Note: The lines shown in this window are also available in the regular Draft Order window (Purchasing -> Draft -> Add/Change), with a Origin code of Sa.  What this window allows is a fast way to review the list of regenerated titles only. Your manually added lines and Special order lines will still need to be processed as normal.

Show only Zero Order Quantity (F6)
If you wish the lines they have been reviewed (shown in white in the image above) to not show, simply check this option.

Finalising a draft purchase order
You can Finalise Orders in this window by using the Finalise Orders (F12) button. Alternatively you can do it from the Draft PO window. It both case the Finalise PO window will display and you can finalise your orders as outlined in the minimum order section.



.topic 1040

The Purchase Order entry window allows you to create purchase orders without going through the draft purchase order system.
The window can also be used as a quick way of adding lines to the draft.
When finalising you will be given the option of saving to draft or creating the purchase order.

Step 1: Open the window
From the main menu select Purchasing/ Draft Order/ Purchase order entry.

Step 2: Select a supplier:	
To select a supplier, click the arrow     in the supplier box and select the new supplier.

Step 3: Header instructions

PO number sequence 				
If you use more than one purchase order number sequence, click on  the down arrow       of the PO # Sequence box and select the sequence you require.
	
Budget month
If you are using the budgeting module, you can change the effective month of the order in the Budget Month box.

(Special) instructions
In the Instructions box you can enter a comment (such as Backorder if out of stock) that you want to appear on the order.
Click on the down arrow       in the box and select the comment you require.

Print Instructions
If you are printing the order you can select the number of copies and choose to by-pass the print preview.

Electronic ordering		
Alternatively if you are using electronic ordering you can click on the EDI check box
You can also select the order instructions (such as Backorder if out of stock or NYP) that you wish to appear on the order.

Quick order
Check this box if you just want to enter ISBNs and the quantities without changing the pricing etc.



Step 4: Input line
Enter the details for each line of the order and then click Save Line ( or press F12 key)

Consignment
If the stock for this line is to be on consignment check this box (or press F7 key).

Price
This shows the current cost price for the title that is stored in the title master.

Royalties (Wholesale version only)				
If the title attracts royalties, check this box and enter the royalties agreement number in the next field.

Step 5: Ordering from a different supplier
If you enter an ISBN in the input line that does not normally come from that supplier you will get a warning message.
Click on the appropriate button in the message window:
Change supplier
Changes the primary supplier in the title
master and adds the line to the order.

Place order	
Adds the line to the order but doesn't
change the supplier in the title master.

Cancel	
Do not add the line to the order.

Step 6: Editing
To make corrections to saved lines, double click on the line in the browser to copy it into the input line. Then type in your changes and click Save Line.
To delete a line, right click on it in the browser and select Delete from the drop down menu.

Step 7: Posting or saving to draft
To post the order, click the Finalise button.
You will getting a dialogue box asking whether you want to finalise the order or save it to draft.
Select the required option ( or Escape to continue adding lines).

Finalise
If finalising, the system will post the order and either display a window showing the purchase order number or (it print preview has been selected) show the purchase order.

Save to draft
If saving to draft  the lines will be copied to draft. In this case the header information is not saved ( you will re-set it when finalising in draft).
The lines will be saved with an origin code of PO.

.topic 2320
This section is for members of Leading Edge group who place their orders through the Leading Edge system and then download an import file from it's web/FTP site to then import that order (without having to re-key it)

Note: It is assumed that you have downloaded the Leading Edge Purchase Order file (e.g. Lonley_Planet_1234.Lee) from the leading Edge website and have saved it to an accessible place on your computer such as C:\e-Bilitydata\EDI\LeadEdge\.

Open the Purchase Order Import window from the main menu: Purchasing /Draft Order/Web PO Import.



Importing a Leading Edge file
Click the Import File (F11) button and navigate to the folder holding your Leading Edge import files.



Select the required file and click the Open button. The file will update two Bookscan tables:  webpoline.dbf and webpohead.dbf. The order will be displayed in the browsers of the Purchase Order Import window.

Suppliers and SANs
Leading Edge orders files link to the suppliers in Bookscan using the supplier's SAN. So you need to have SANs set up for each supplier in the Address tab of your supplier master.
If you don't have a SAN set for a supplier, the Purchase Order Import window will display '????' in the code column of the upper browser. For an example see the second line in the PO Import window diagram above. SAN 9012826 needs to be added to the supplier's SAN field. You will need to fix this before proceeding. Open the supplier master and enter the missing SANs. Then, back in the PO Import window use the right mouse to open the context menu and select 'Update suppliers'. The browser will now display correctly.

Products not on file
If any lines in the lower browser are shown in yellow, it means that the product is not in Bookscan. To add products to the master file, highlight them in the browser and open the context menu (by right clicking the mouse) and select 'Add selected ISBNs'. The products will be added to the master with these fields completed: ISBN, title, author, sell price, RRP and supplier.
All items must be in the title master before you can create an Bookscan purchase order.

Select a purchase order number
The Next PO number field will display the next available PO number. You can change the PO sequence here if you wish, and set a budget month if you use the budgeting functionality. Tick the check box to print the purchase order as it is created.

Creating the purchase order
In the upper browser, highlight the order you wish to process into Bookscan.
Click the Save PO (F12) button to process it.
The purchase order will be created and will be displayed like any other purchase in the Purchasing Order Enquiry window.









.topic 1070

Purchase orders can be viewed in the Purchase Order Enquiry window. Open the window from the main menu: Purchasing/Final/Enquire.
Purchase orders can be viewed by either supplier or by PO number. From the window you can print various reports and amend or delete purchase orders



Looking up purchase orders by supplier
Select a supplier in the supplier box. The browser will display all the outstanding orders on that supplier.
The Supplier POs combo box will fill with just that supplier's purchase order numbers. Select a PO in the combo box and the browser will display the order.

Looking up purchase orders by number
Enter the required PO number into the All POs combo box lists to display it in the browser.

Consignment stock
Consignment stock lines on order are shown in the browser in yellow.

Summary Details:
·	Value at cost/sell - shows the total value of the outstanding titles at cost/sell.
·	Items on order - total number of items not yet supplied.

Editing purchase orders
Click on the edit button to display the various editing buttons. Alternatively, you can call these functions using the context menu. Most of the buttons are self explanatory but the function of the Edit Item and Edit All buttons is outlined below:



Edit Item
Highlight a line you wish to edit and click the Edit Item button. A pop up window will open:



Here you can edit the master comments and status, the quantity on order, the shipping date and the purchase order comments.

Edit All
To edit all lines in the browser, click the Edit All button. A pop up window will open:



Here you can edit the master comments and status, the shipping date and the purchase order comments.

Cancellation report
The cancellation report function will allow you to create a letter to the supplier canceling an order, either print or email that letter, delete the purchase order from the file and re-direct the order to the draft (if required).
Click on the Cancellation Rpt (F6) button, and the window will go into Cancellation mode, with 'Cancellations' displayed in red at the top of the window. Two columns, 'Cancel' and 'Select' will be added to the browser.



·	To select a line to be cancelled double click on the Select column.
·	To change the cancellation quantity, double click on the Cancel column. A pop up window (see diagram above) will open where you can type in the new figure and click OK.
Click the Print Report (F12) button. The report will print (and be stored for emailing by e-Comms) and another pop up will display



Make sure the report has printed correctly before proceeding. Clicking 'yes' will delete the lines from the purchase order. If you wish you can re-route the lines to draft purchase orders to re-order from a different supplier. Clicking 'No' leaves the order lines unaffected.

Enquiry Report
The enquiry report function will allow you to create a letter to the supplier enquiring on order. If in the supplier master, the supplier has been set up for emailing, the letter will be emailed by e-Comms.
Click on the Enquiry Report (F8) button, and the window will go into Enquiry Report mode, with 'Enquiry Report' displayed in red at the top of the window. A new column 'Select' will be added to the browser.
·	To select a line to be enquired on, double click on the Select column.
·	Click the Print Report (F12) button. The report will print (and be stored for emailing by e-Comms).

Special Orders
The Special Orders function will allow you to create a letter to the customer for whom a purchase order has been placed. Click on the Special Orders (F8) button, and the window will go into Special Orders mode. Only items which have special orders on them will be displayed in the browser. Two new columns will be added to the browser – 'customer' and 'select'. The customer column will display the name of the customer the item has been ordered for.
·	To select the line to be reported on, double click on the Select column.
·	Click the Print Report (F12) button and the report will.

Alternate PO
If an alternate PO number has been added to an order it will be displayed in the Alternate PO field. The edit this number or add an alternate number, click on the Edit Alternate PO button. Alternate PO numbers relate to Leading Edge orders; see the Purchase Order import section below.

Reports
To view the available purchase order report, click on the printer icon on the main toolbar.
This will display the reports:
·	Reprint - reprint a purchase order.
·	All - print a summary of all outstanding purchase orders.
·	Outstanding – print all POs placed with the currently selected supplier.
·	Back orders – print all POs on backorder with the supplier.
·	Back orders with (supplier) - print all backorders with the currently selected supplier.




.topic 1080

Summary of receiving procedures

Receiving is done in the Receiving Stock window. Open the window from the main menu: Purchasing\Incoming\Receive.

Set up to receive stock
·	Select the supplier.
·	Enter the supplier invoice details.
·	Select the purchase orders

Entering the stock
For each item received:
·	Scan the barcode of each item received.
·	Enter the quantity invoiced and quantity received.
·	Enter the amount you have been charged for the stock (your cost price).
·	Set your selling price, if not already set.
·	Mark the products to have barcode labels printed, if required.

Post into stock
After entering all lines of the receipt:
·	Print the goods received note. Any items ordered for special orders will have special order slips printed.
·	Click on the Post button.

Effects of posting
For each line of the receipt
·	If the barcode label flag has been set, barcode labels will print.
·	The last cost price in the title master will be overwritten with the unit cost of this receipt line.
·	The selling and retail prices in the title master will be updated.
·	Stock will be assigned to special orders.
·	The on hand stock level will be increased.
·	The purchase order lines relating to this receipt will be marked as received. Completed purchase orders will be deleted.
·	The total of the supplier invoice will be posted to the accounts payable file and can be viewed in the Creditors window (if you are using the Creditors module).
·	The supplier invoice details will be saved to the receiving history files, ready for export to MYOB.
·	A line will be added to the stock history file for each item. This can be viewed in the Stock History tab of the title Master window.
·	Any credit claim will also be printed, posted to the creditors file, stored in the returns history file ready for export to MYOB and saved to the stock history file for viewing in the Title Master window.

					
Related items
Receiving second hand goods

	   Detailed Steps

.topic 1090

Receiving is done in the Receiving Stock window. Open the window from the main menu: Purchasing\Incoming\Receive.

Entering the supplier invoice details
The steps outlined below assume you have received the stock and an invoice from your supplier. If you do not have the invoice, you can still book the delivery into stock using a dummy invoice number which can be amended when you receive the actual invoice: see 'Receiving without an invoice' below.
The receiving window links directly with Bookscan's creditors module (if you are using that function) and exports the supplier invoice data to MYOB. So it is important that the supplier invoice fields are completed accurately.

Products are received into stock using the Receiving window. Open the window from the main menu: Purchasing/ Incoming/ Receive.

Supplier selection
·	Select the supplier in the Supplier combo box by one of the following methods
·	Type the supplier code in the field and press the Enter key.
·	Use the mouse to select the supplier from the drop down box.
·	Click on the F3  button (or press the F3 key) to open the supplier search window.
·	Click on the Alt F3  button (or press the Alt and F3 keys) to load the last supplier that you used in the program.
The supplier's settings will load in the window.

Supplier invoice details
Then enter the following information in the appropriate supplier invoice fields:
·	Invoice number,
·	Invoice date,
·	Invoice due date,
·	Invoice total (including tax),
·	Invoice tax (GST or VAT).
	
Purchase order selection
You will need to receive your delivery against the purchase orders with which you ordered the stock. Purchase Orders combo box drop down list will display all the selected suppliers unfilled purchase orders. Use the mouse to select purchase orders from the drop down box or type them one at a time in the field and press the enter key.
As you select each purchase order, its number will display in the multi-line box below the combo box and the outstanding lines on the PO will display in the browser.

You can receive stock without a purchase order, by ticking the None (F4) checkbox to the right of the PO fields.
(Be warned that if you do this, and the goods were ordered using Bookscan purchase orders, the purchase orders will remain as outstanding on the system. By receiving against purchase orders, the program can mark the orders as fulfilled as you post the receipt into stock).



Shortcut
If you don't know what purchase order a product is on, you can click on the PO's on Code button (F6). The edit line will clear, leaving just the barcode filed. Scan the products barcode into the Barcode field. A pop up window will be displayed, listing all the purchase orders for that product. Double click on the PO to select it.

Entering the stock
There are three ways of entering the lines of a receipt:
·	Scanning the barcodes,
·	Double clicking a line in the browser,
·	Receiving off the invoice or packing slip.

Scanning
In this scenario you scan the barcode of each item in the delivery.
Scan the barcode into the Barcode field
(If you don't know the product code you can search for the product by clicking the F2 button to open the Title Search window. You can also click the Alt F2 button to load the last product you used in the program).
The edit line will display in scan mode:
·	Inv Qty: this will default to quantity you have ordered on the selected purchase order. If the supplier has invoiced you for a different amount overtype this figure. In the example you have been invoiced for the full five copies of Jerilderie Letter that you order on PO #50058.
·	Add: the Add field defaults to '1'. (You can overtype this if you want). This is the number you are adding to the receipt on this scan.
·	Rec'd: this is the quantity you have already scanned in. In the example, three have already been scanned in and one more is being added.
·	Claims: this shows the number of items that have still not been received in. If it is not subsequently scanned in, it will become a credit claim for a short-supplied item.

Click the Save Line (F12) button, or press the F12 button, to save the line. Then scan the next item and so on.

Double clicking
Double click a line in the browser, loads the line into browser in edit mode:
·	Inv Qty: this will default to quantity you have ordered on the selected purchase order. If the supplier has invoiced you for a different amount overtype this figure.
·	Rec'd: type in the number of this item that you have received.
·	Claims: this shows that one item has still not been received in. If the Rec'd quantity is not amended, it will become s credit claim for a short-supplied item.

Click the Save Line (F12) button, or press the F12 button, to save the line. Then double-click the next item and so on.

Receiving off the invoice
If you have checked off the delivery against the invoice or packing slip, then you don't have to enter the receipt line by line. Use the right mouse button to open the context menu and select 'Receive all'. All the lines in the browser will show as fully received.
You can then edit any line by double clicking on it to load it into the edit line.

Receiving errors
You can also record where stock has been received damaged or faulty, the wrong product has been sent or you have been short supplied.
(Note: Depending on your supplier, you may not be able to make a claim this way. You may have to receive the stock in and then make a returns authorisation request for the damaged products. This is done in the returns area: from the main menu select Purchasing/ Returns/ Add/Change).

Load the relevant line to the edit line and click on the Claims button. The Claims pop up window will open:



The default is for the items to be set as 'short-supplied'. Type a new quantity in the appropriate field to change this. In the example above, the supplier has invoiced 3 of Gulliver's Travels. However they have only supplied one and one of those is damaged. So there are two claims, one short-supplied and one damaged.

Other settings
Barcode labels: tick the Barcode checkbox to have the program print barcode labels when posting.
Consignment: tick the Consignment checkbox to treat the stock as consignment stock. You must have purchased the consignment module to be able to use this feature.

Pricing
In the Receiving window you need to record the cost of each receipt line. You can also set the sell price and the recommended retail price (RRP) here. There are many pricing options, including receiviving stockinvoiced in a foreign currency. Click on this link for full details on pricing.

Cost prices
For each product received, the cost that you enter when processing the receipt will be set as the last cost price in the title master. It will also be used to re-calculate its average cost price.
Note: the average and last cost prices in Bookscan are stored exclusive of tax. In most cases your suppliers' invoices will display prices that are inclusive of tax.

Selling prices
If you are selling products at the recommended retail price, you will probably already have your selling price set in the title master and there will be no need to change them here. However if the price you set is to be determined by price charged to you, or if you have not yet set a selling price, you can set it here in the Receiving window. There are various price calculators built into the window to help you determine your selling price. These are detailed later in this chapter.
Note: the selling price and RRP in Bookscan are stored inclusive of tax.

Setting cost and selling prices
There are many configurations for handling prices during the receiving process. We show the simplest way first and look at some alternate methods. For the next example, the settings on the Details tab of the supplier master are as follows:
·	GST Inclusive:  the supplier's invoices show prices and totals are inclusive of tax.
·	Tax exempt flag: this is set to false
·	Pricing method: this is left as 'Not set'.
·	Currency: this is set to the local currency.



With these supplier settings, the edit line of the Receiving window is configured as displayed below:



As you load a product into the edit line for the first time, the cost, sell and retail fields will display the values set in the title master (when you re-load a line, the values will be those you have saved).



Note that the cost price displayed in the master file is exclusive of tax; the cost in the Receiving window is inclusive.

If the amount you have been charged for this product on the invoice is different from the price stored in the Cost (Inc) field, type the new amount into the field. The program will calculate the margin on this line and will display it in the Margin field.

If you wish to change your selling price, type the new price into the Sell (Inc) field. Similarly you can change the RRP field here. When you post the receipt, the selling and retail prices in the master file will be updated.

Post into stock

When you have entered all lines of the receipt, click on the Save to List (F7) button. Then you can either:
·	Move on to receiving the next delivery by clicking the Next Delivery (F7) button, or
·	Move to the received goods list by clicking the List (F9) button. From here you can post deliveries into stock.

Receiving window: List view
In List view, the receiving window will display two browsers:
·	The upper browser will list all receipts waiting to be posted into stock.
·	The lower browser will display the lines of the receipt currently selected in the upper browser.



To edit a receipt, double click on it in either browser. This will close list view and return the window to the original view, with the selected receipt loaded, ready for editing.

Goods received note
Before posting a receipt into stock, you will need to print a goods received note.
You can also choose to print at the same time the following reports:
·	Special order slips – these slips are placed with the stock to identify it as for a special order.
·	Special order letters – these are letters to customers advising them that their special is ready for collection. If an email address is stored against the customer, this letter can be emailed to customer by Bookscan e-Comms.
·	Title not supplied – this is a list of the specials orders for which there was insufficient stock received.

Posting
To post a receipt into stock, select it in the upper browser and then click on the Post (F9) button. This will open the Barcode & Post window.



Here you can choose which receipts to post:
·	the selected receipts,
·	all suppliers, or
·	all receipts for the selected supplier.

You can set some barcode labels printing options:
Print Barcode for all items: Forces the printing of barcodes, overwriting any earlier setting. You can also choose the label type.
Preprinted labels: Tick this checkbox if you have labels with a pre-printed logo.
Release web backorders: Tick this to release stock to fill e-Web backorders.



Click on the Post button to proceed.
If the total value of the received stock, including the value of any credit claims, is equal to the supplier invoice total, the receipt will be posted into stock and you will have finished.
If the amounts are not equal, the Check Invoice Totals window will display:



To ensure that the cost of goods matches your accounts payable, the total cost of your receipt should equal the supplier invoice total. If they a different, you should return to the Receiving window to amend your costs, though you can proceed with posting if you wish.
You can also amend the invoice and tax totals here.
Click the Post (F12) button to post the receipt or click the Cancel button (or press the Escape key) to return to the Receiving window.

Effects of posting
For each line of the receipt
·	If the barcode label flag has been set, barcode labels will print.
·	The last cost price in the title master will be overwritten with the unit cost of this receipt line.
·	The selling and retail prices in the title master will be updated.
·	Stock will be assigned to special orders.
·	The on hand stock level will be increased.
·	The purchase order lines relating to this receipt will be marked as received. Completed purchase orders will be deleted.
·	The total of the supplier invoice will be posted to the accounts payable file and can be viewed in the Creditors window (if you are using the Creditors module).
·	The supplier invoice details will be saved to the receiving history files, ready for export to MYOB.
·	A line will be added to the stock history file. This can be viewed in the Stock History tab of the title Master window.

Other settings in the receiving window

Barcode Printing
You can choose to print barcodes either progressively, as you enter each line, or later when you post the receipt into stock.
For progressive printing, tick the 'Progressive Barcode Print' checkbox located at the centre right of the Receiving window. With this flag set, barcodes will print as you press Save Line (F12) for each product.
Note: The default setting for printing of barcodes is set on the Purchasing tab System options. Here you can choose to always print or never print barcodes.

List view - upper browser
Errors column
In the upper browser, where deliveries had errors on them, the Errors column will display a tick. When you post, these lines will create a credit claim. To produce a Request for Goods form instead, double click on the Claims field to untick it.

List view - lower browser
Over Supplied
It will mark a line of an invoice in green if the quantity coming in is greater than the order quantity. (Where you receive lines against no Purchase Order; all these lines will be indicated in green).

Special Orders
Where there are special orders attached to a product in the browser, the 'Spec' column will display a tick.

Price Change
Products where you have changed a selling price during the receipt, will display a tick in the 'P_Ch' column of the browser. Also, when processing a line, if you change the selling price and there is stock on hand, the program will warn you that you may need to r-label your existing stock.

	

                    Return to summary

.topic 2690
Pricing calculation options
The default pricing calculations method can be set on Details tab of the Supplier Master window for each supplier. You can also set the standard discount or margin for each supplier in the Standard Discount field. However, you can set, change or remove the pricing calculator, and change the discount/margin, as you process each line in the Receiving window. The default pricing method is "not set".
The pricing calculator is used when you need to calculate the either the sell or cost price. For some settings it will change the order in which the price fields are displayed.

No Auto Calculations
There is a checkbox called 'No Auto Calculations' on both the Details tab of the supplier master and in the Receiving window. With this option ticked, the edit line of the receiving window will display according to the pricing method set, but it will not automatically calculate the Cost or Sell fields; you will need to overtype them when required.

Not Set
This option will suit most users for most suppliers.



·	The order of the pricing fields is: Cost, Margin, Sell, Retail.
·	When you first select a line of a receipt, the Cost, Sell and Retail price fields will load the values stored in the title master against the product.
·	You will need to manually key in Cost, Sell and Retail Price where necessary.
·	As the cost and sell price are changed, the Margin field is re-calculated.
·	The 'No Auto Calculations' setting has no effect on this value.

Discount off retail
The cost price will be calculated at retail less the supplier's standard discount.



·	The order of the pricing fields is: Retail, Discount, Cost, Sell.
With 'auto calculations'
·	When you first select a line of a receipt, the Retail and Sell price fields will load the values stored in the title master against the product. The Discount field will load with the standard discount. The Cost price will be calculated using the retail less the discount.
·	If you overtype the Retail field, the cost price is re-calculated and the Sell price is set to the retail price.
·	If you overtype the Discount field, the cost price is re-calculated.
·	If you overtype the Cost field, the Discount field is re-calculated.
'No auto calculations'
·	When you first select a line of a receipt, the Retail, Cost and Sell price fields will load the values stored in the title master against the product. The Discount field will be calculated using the retail and cost prices.
·	Where necessary, overtype the Retail, Cost and Sell price fields. The Discount field will be calculated as you change either the retail or cost prices.
·	If you overtype the Discount field, the cost price is re-calculated.

Discount off sell
The cost price is calculated by discounting off the sell price for that supplier. It is very rarely used. It is identical to Discount off Retail above except that the Retail and Sell fields are interchanged.

Markup on Cost
The sell price will be calculated by applying the markup percentage to the cost price. The markup used is the setting in the 'Discount' field.



·	The order of the pricing fields is: Cost, Markup, Sell, Retail.
·	When you first select a line of a receipt, the Cost, Sell and Retail price fields will load the values stored in the title master against the product. The Markup field will be calculated using the cost and sell prices.
With 'auto calculations'
·	If you overtype the Cost field, the Markup will display the standard markup. The Sell price is re-calculated using the Cost and Markup fields.
·	If you overtype the Markup field, the sell price is re-calculated.
·	If you overtype the Sell field, the Markup field is re-calculated.
·	If you need to change the Retail field, overtype it.
 'No auto calculations'
·	The Markup field will be set to 'read only'.
·	You will need to type in any changes to Cost, Sell or Retail fields. Changes the Cost or Sell field will cause the Markup field to be re-calculated.

Margin
The selling price will calculated by applying the set margin to the cost price. The margin used is the setting in the 'Discount' field.



·	The order of the pricing fields is: Cost, Margin, Sell, Retail.
·	When you first select a line of a receipt, the Cost, Sell and Retail price fields will load the values stored in the title master against the product. The Margin field will be calculated using the cost and sell prices.
With 'auto calculations'
·	If you overtype the Cost field, the Margin will display the standard margin. The Sell price is re-calculated using the Cost and Margin fields.
·	If you overtype the Margin field, the sell price is re-calculated.
·	If you overtype the Sell field, the Margin field is re-calculated.
·	If you need to change the Retail field, overtype it.
 'No auto calculations'
·	The Margin field will be set to 'read only'.
·	You will need to type in any changes to Cost, Sell or Retail fields. Changes the Cost or Sell field will cause the Margin field to be re-calculated.

Receiving in foreign currency
Where a supplier's invoices are in a foreign currency, you should set them up as a foreign currency supplier. This is done on the Details tab of the Supplier Master window. Set the currency the supplier uses in the Currency dropdown box. This will cause the red 'Foreign Currency' field to display. The available pricing calculators will be:
·	not set,
·	markup on cost,
·	margin
By setting the supplier as foreign currency, the money amounts displayed in the Creditors windows and on Credit Claims will be the supplier's currency.
Note: you will need regularly to set the exchange rates in the Currency window as the Receiving window will use these to calculate your cost and sell prices. The Currency window is opened from the main menu: Tables/ Authority Tables/ Currency.

Receiving
When a foreign currency supplier is selected in the Receiving window the display will change as illustrated below:



The exchange rate is set to the rate stored in the Currency file. You can overtype the rate if you wish.
In the edit line an extra field is displayed. The program always calculates the cost price from the foreign currency cost price.



·	The order of the pricing fields is: O/S Cost, Cost, Margin, Sell, Retail.
·	When you first select a line of a receipt, the O/S Cost, Sell and Retail price fields will load the values stored in the title master against the product.
·	The cost price will be calculated from the O/S Cost and the exchange rate..
·	The Margin field will be calculated using the cost and sell prices.
With 'auto calculations'
·	If you overtype the O/S Cost field, the cost price is re-calculated. The Margin will display the standard margin. The Sell price is re-calculated using the Cost and Margin fields.
·	If you overtype the Cost field, the Margin will display the standard margin. The Sell price is re-calculated using the Cost and Margin fields.
·	If you overtype the Margin field, the sell price is re-calculated.
·	If you overtype the Sell field, the Margin field is re-calculated.
·	If you need to change the Retail field, overtype it.
 'No auto calculations'
·	The Margin field will be set to 'read only'.
·	If you overtype the O/S Cost field, the cost price and margin are re-calculated.
·	You will need to type in any changes to Sell or Retail fields. Changes the Cost or Sell field will cause the Margin field to be re-calculated.

If the 'mark up' pricing method is set, the program behaves the same as for 'margin' except that a percentage markup is used in the sell price calculations. The 'not set pricing method behaves the same as the 'margin' setting with 'no auto calculations' set.


.topic 1100

The buyback option allows you to buy back books from customers in a point of sale environment with full cash and sales reporting.

ISBNs
Barcodes of second hand titles in Bookscan are recorded with the prefix 988 replacing the standard 978. So for ISBN  978040930309, second hand copies will be recorded as 988040930309.

Setting up the system for second hand titles
· Second hand titles all have supplier code BUYB. If it is not already on your database, add it in Supplier Maintenance.

· You may wish to set up a separate department , or departments,  for second hand titles. This would allow financial tracking of second hand stock. If you do add a second hand department, we recommend that you give it the code BUY. (See the shortcut below).

· All titles for which you intend to stock second hand titles, can be entered manually in the title master. In the Barcode field, you will have to enter 988 and then the ISBN (less the check digit) as described in the paragraph above.  Set the Cost Price field to be the average price you expect to pay to buy back the title.  Set the Sell Price field to be the average price for which you expect to sell the title.

Important short cut: If you do not have the 988-prefixed barcode set up, the system will automatically create it for you when you first scan the 978-prefixed barcode into the Buyback window's barcode field. All the fields from the 978-prefixed barcodes master record will be copied to the second hand one, except that:
·	"SECOND HAND COPY" will be appended to the end of the title,
·	 you will be able to select the BUY department, 978-prefixed barcode's department or a different department
·	the Minimum Stock field will be set to zero.
·	the Firm Sale  field will be set to true (i.e. no return to supplier allowed),
 To operate this feature the Auto create ISBN checkbox (just above the Barcode field)  must be selected

Buying in second hand books
Step 1:
Open the Buy back window: from the main menu, click on Purchasing, then point to Incoming and then click on Second hand.

Step 2:
Scan the barcode on the book. The system will do one of two things:
·  	If the title has a 988-prefixed barcode, i.e. the title was previously sold as a second hand title, it will accept it into the system and display the title on the screen with the median cost price.
·  	If the title has a 978-prefixed barcode, i.e. a normal barcode, Bookscan will translate it to a 988 prefix and look for the title in the title master. If it finds it, it displays the title and median cost price.
·	If it finds the 978-prefixed barcode but doesn't find the 988-prefixed barcode it, the system will offer to create the 988-prefixed barcode. You will need the Auto create ISBN checkbox selected for this to occur. (See the shortcut above).

Step 3:
Determine from the condition of the book how much you wish to pay for it and overtype this amount n the Price field and click the Add button.
When all titles from this customer have been entered, click the Finished button. The total price will be displayed. Click the Finish button again to open the Tender Type window. Select the Tender Type and click OK.

Step 4:
Print the goods received note for the BUYB supplier and then post the stock and print the barcodes as when receiving standard stock. Cover the existing barcodes with the new 988 barcode labels. The labels will display the median price. As the sell price will vary with the condition of the book, you will need to strike through the price on the barcode label and write the appropriate sell price beside it..

Selling second hand titles
When second hand books are sold, the only difference is that you may need to overtype the sell price when it varies from the median.

Reconciling buy backs and sales
The end of day sales reports will detail buy back operations as follows:

All Sales Report
If you created buy back departments, sales of second hand titles will be reported under them.

Cashbook	
Titles purchased through the Buy back facility will display as tender type Second Hand Buy Back. They are "Cash Out" figures i.e. debt entries which are taken off the normal "Cash In" transactions so you can balance the cash drawer.


.topic 2290
EDI invoices are electronic copies of your suppliers' invoices that you would normally receive on paper. The advantage of soft copy invoices is that you can receive your stock without keying the data. This saves time and improves accuracy.

To use Bookscan's EDI facilities you must have a Pacstream account. See the EDI chapter for details. Once you have signed up for the Pacstream service, many of your suppliers will forward their invoices to you via Pacstream. Bookscan e-Comms will interface with Pacstream and download the invoices. The EDI invoices can be viewed in the EDI invoices window which is opened from the main menu: Purchasing/ Incoming/ EDI Invoices.



The upper (invoice) browser lists the header information for all outstanding EDI invoices. The lower (lines) browser displays the lines of the invoice selected in the upper browser.

Processing an EDI invoice receipt
·	Select the invoice in the Invoice browser.
·	Click on the Scan Stock (F11) button to open the pop up scanning window.
·	Scan the barcode of the stock. Change the quantity if required. (Alternatively have the Singles (F7) checkbox ticked and just scan the barcode of each product).
·	If you receive more than the invoiced amount of any product, the program will prompt you before you save the line. If you scan a product not on the invoce, the program will display a warning message.
·	To edit the quantities or to set stock as received damaged etc, double click on the either the Qty, Rec or To Go column in the lower browser. The following window will open where you can edit the quantities.

·	As a shortcut, you can select "Receive all this invoice" from the lower browser's context menu. All lines of the sleected order will be set to the invoice quantity.
·	If you don't want to enter the stock at all, just tick the box marked "Don't scan stock", then click the Receive (F8) button.
·	Once all items are received, click the Receive (F8) button. The receipt will be loaded into the received stock file.
·	The program will offer to open the Receiving window where you can post the receipt.
·	Click OK and the Receiving window will open in list view with your new receipt loaded.
·	Make any amendments here, print the GRN and post into stock as usual.



Identifying suppliers
Pacstream uses SANs to uniquely identify suppliers. When Bookscan e-Comms is retrieving the invoice from Pacstream, it matches the SAN with SANs stored in the supplier master. Where a match is made the supplier code is displayed in the Supp column of the Invoice browser. Where you haven't yet set the SAN against the supplier, this column will display '****'.



To correct this, identify the supplier concerned, open the Supplier Master window and enter the SAN there. Then use the right mouse to open context menu in the EDI Invoices window and select 'Update suppliers', as shown in the diagram above. The Supp column will now display the supplier code and you can now process that invoice.

Setting prices
In the lines browser, the 'Cost' and 'Retail' columns are the prices quoted on the supplier invoice. The Sell column displays your sell price from the master file. Whether the program automatically updates your sell price when you post your receipt into stock, depends on the setting of this supplier's 'No auto calculations' flag.
Whether you set that flag will depend on your work practices:
·	If you have set your sell prices already, set the supplier's 'No auto calculations' flag to true.
·	If you are setting prices as you receive the stock, set the flag to false and set the appropriate pricing calculation. This will cause the sell price to be calculated when the EDI invoice is loaded into the Receiving window.

Unknown product codes
If a product on an EDI invoice is not in your database, the Title column will display in the lines browser as "Item not on master file". You will need to add the title to the database to be able to receive it.



To add the product, use the right mouse to open context menu in the EDI Invoices window and select 'Add selected ISBNs', as shown in the diagram above. The program will first search the archive, and if it finds the product there re-load it into the master. Next the program will do a web search (Title Page, Nielsen Bookdata or Global BIP) to find the title. Alternatively you can just add the title manually through the New Title window.

Viewing Processed EDI Invoices

You can view processed EDI invoices by ticking the Show Processed checkbox on the EDI Invoices window. When the box is ticked the browsers will display both processed and unprocessed invoices. Processed invoices will display a tick in the 'P' Column.


.topic 2610
Your receipts from suppliers can be viewed in the Good Inwards History window. To open it, select Purchasing/Incoming/Receiving history from the main menu. Double click on a line to edit the invoice details of any transaction.


.topic 1333
RETURNS TO SUPPLIERS

There are two situations where returns are done:

No fault returns
This is where stock has been supplied as "sale or return" and it is now time to return it. You can have the system generate a draft returns list of all such returnable stock. The system will automatically allocate the original invoice numbers and cost prices to each item on the Draft Returns List.

Other returns	
These are where stock has been either:
·	wrongly supplied,
·	supplied damaged,
·	supplied with faulty printing or binding,
·	superseded by a new edition or
·	recalled by the supplier.
These returns will need to be added manually to the draft returns list. You will need to allocate original invoice number to each item as you add it to the draft.

Returns to supplier - procedures summary

Generate the draft list
Create a list of draft returns in the Returns Generation window.

Groom the draft
Manually groom this draft returns list in the Draft returns window.

Pick the stock
Print the draft returns list for each supplier and use this to pick the stock.
Then edit the draft for items not found or in unreturnable condition.

Add other returns
Add wrongly supplied, damaged or faulty stock to the draft.

Returns authorisation
Print a Returns Authorisation Request for each supplier.

Return stock and post returns
When authority to return the stock is received, re-edit the draft, if necessary.
Post the return. This removes the items from stock and a credit claim is generated.
Return the stock with the credit claim to the supplier.


	Details




.topic 1150

Generate a draft returns list
Open the Returns Generation window from the main menu: Purchasing/ Returns/Add-Change & select Regenerate F9.



You can choose to generate returns by Department, Supplier or Imprint. The default is by Supplier.
Generating returns by department.
This is a way of reducing your stock holding within a certain area. It is not a routine, regular procedure like normal monthly returns.
For example, if you had built up your children's area for Children's Book Week, you may now want to reduce stock to more normal levels afterwards.
Generating returns by supplier or imprint
These are the options to set to do your regular no fault returns. It is imperative that this is done routinely to ensure that old stock does not become non-returnable and that your stock holding does become not become excessive.
Select departments, suppliers or imprints
Select one of departments, suppliers or imprints in the 'Select by' combo box. The list box on the right of the window will then display a corresponding list of departments, suppliers or imprints.
Select the suppliers (or imprints or departments) in the list box. To make multiple selections, hold the Control key down while clicking on further suppliers etc. Click the Select F12 Generate to create a list.
 Setting the returns parameters
There are two different methods that can be use in the generation:
Generate from First Invoice
Generate from Last Invoice

The minimum and maximum number of days since Last/First invoice would normally be set to the supplier's terms.
For example, if the supplier's terms were that stock must be kept for three months, but can only be returned up to six months after supply, then set the parameters as follows:

Minimum days 	90
Maximum days	180

The example applies to both options however it depends on which invoices (the oldest invoice date or the last invoice date) that the supplier allows to be used in calculating eligibility for return.

Select which method the supplier selected.
Generate from First Invoice: is used for those suppliers whose Sale or Returns condition (SOR) applies from date of publication (as the first invoice is close to the pub.date).
Generate from Last Invoice: is used for those suppliers who will allow returns after 3 months up to a specified period eg 180 days (6 months) from when the stock was invoiced, irrespective of publication date.
	
Title Options
Set the following flags:

Ignore sale or return flag	
This refers to the Firm Sale flag on the title master.  If you are confident of the accuracy of your title master leave this unchecked. Then only returnable titles will appear in the draft. In many shops, where various people have done data entry, the Firm Sale flag may be unreliable. In this case check the box to ignore the flag. This means that any non-returnable lines will have to be separated out manually.

Include consignment titles (if enabled)
This, when ticked, will allow consignment titles to be included in the returns list that will be generated.

Include ordinary titles
This is the default criteria selected and refers to all titles except consignment, firm sale or stock on hold.

Delete existing hold titles	
This refers to any titles which may be on hold in the Draft Returns Lists. Depending on your practices, there may be say, damaged stock on hold awaiting returns authorisation. In that case leave the box unchecked, as you don't want these removed from the draft.

Note: any items in the draft returns file which are not 'on hold', will be deleted from the file when you re-generate.  If there is anything in files you want kept there, make sure its 'hold' flag is set to true before re-generating.

Generate list
Click the Generate button to generate the Draft Returns List. Alternatively, click the Cancel button, or press the Escape key, to exit.
After generation, all stock lines that meet the criteria will be placed into Draft Returns, where you can check,process and post them.

Allocation of invoice numbers
Each time you receive goods from a supplier, the invoice number, invoice date and the cost price at the time of receiving are stored in the receiving history database.

When you generate returns, the system first finds what stock is available to return, and adds them to the returns draft.

It then allocates the original supplier invoice numbers against each title being returned.

It is assumed that the oldest copies receive first and so allocates the invoice number in reverse date order. Where the quantity being returned exceeds the quantity on the first relevant invoice for the date period, the excess is allocated to the next invoice and so on until all returns have an allocated invoice number.

For example, say you are returning stock of a title where you received a delivery of four in March and a further four in April. Say you sold two and wanted to return the six unsold copies. The system will return four copies against the March invoice and two against the April invoice.

The browser of the Draft Returns window will show two lines, one for each invoice number quoted.


Draft Returns List
The draft returns list is used to pick the stock from the shelves. From the main menu, select Purchasing/Returns/Reports and then click on Draft. The Draft Returns Parameters window will open.



Set your parameters
Optionally check or uncheck the 'Include hold titles'.
Uncheck the 'Include authorisation request' and Email Request boxes.
Select the supplier or tick the 'For all suppliers' check box.

Click the OK button to run the report.

This report displays the titles listed by Department. After printing the report, pick the stock from the shelves and then edit the draft (see the instructions in the next section) for items not found or in unreturnable condition.

Note: You can choose to leave this stock on the shelf until the Returns Authorisation is received from the supplier, then print this list and pick what they approve.

Draft Returns window
The Draft Returns window is where you process your returns to supplier. Open the window from the main menu: Purchasing/ Returns/ Add-Change.




View all draft returns
If the Supplier Filter checkbox is not ticked, all draft returns will display in the browser. As you highlight a line in the browser, the details of that line's supplier are displayed in the upper part of the window. To filter on that supplier, tick the Supplier Filter (F6) checkbox.

Filter by supplier
Alternatively to filter on a supplier, select the supplier in the combo box. The draft returns list for that supplier will be displayed in the browser. Use can use the F3 button to open the Supplier search window.

Find suppliers with draft returns
To view a list of all suppliers with draft returns, click the Draft Suppliers (F4) button. A pop up window will display listing all suppliers with items in the draft. Select the supplier by highlighting it in the pop up list and clicking the OK button (or just double click on the supplier) and the new supplier's draft returns will display in the browser.

Other filters
To further filter the lines displayed, you can select, in the Other filters combo box:
Invoice generated titles only: display only titles falling within the suppliers return parameters.
Titles added from Title Master context (right mouse) menu 'Add to Draft Returns' option.
Operator titles only: display only those titles added manually, rather than by the generation process.
Returns unheld titles only. Titles generate on hold in the draft and are released to process on a return.

Adding a line to the draft
You can manually add a line to the draft. Just scan (or type) the barcode into the Add Line field. If the item is already in the draft, you will be asked whether to go to the existing record or to add a new line. If adding the new line, the Edit Draft Return window will open where you can enter the number to be returned, select the original invoice and amend other settings: see the Edit Draft Return window section below.
Alternatively, to add a new line, click on the F2 button or open the context(right mouse) menu and select 'Add new line'. The title master and Title Find windows will open where you can select the required product.

Deleting a line from the draft
To delete lines from the draft, select them in the browser and press the Delete key (or open the context (right mouse) menu and select 'Delete'

Draft returns browser
Column headings
Srce		Source of the draft returns. Options are:
		O Operator (manually entered)
		I   Invoice (generated in the Returns Generation window)
T Added from Title Master (manually added via 'Add to Draft Returns' from context (right mouse) menu)	
Title		Title of the returned item
ISBN		ISBN or catalogue number, depending on your configuration.
Qty		Quantity to be returned.
RRP		Recommended retail price.
On Hand	Stock on hand.
Firm		Firm sale flag set in the title master.
H		On hold
Dept		Sales department for this title (default sort order in screen)
Cons		When set, this flag indicates a return of consignment stock (if enabled).
Comments	Master file comments



Notes on the browser
Items in the browser that are 'on hold' show with a magenta background.
Use the navigation buttons on the toolbar to navigate through the browser.	
To open the title master for an item, select the line in the browser, open the context menu (by right clicking the mouse) and select 'View master'.

Context (right mouse) menu
Check the right mouse options in this screen. Most options are self explanatory.
Value: allows you to value the total of a draft claim before finalizing. It includes all unheld totals.
Skip to Dept: Returns generated sorted by Department in the list. This is a means of dropping down through the listed departments quickly, type the department code you wish to go to.
Print Draft: is an alternate means of  printing RAs and picking lists (instead of going to the tool bar printer icon).

Items on hold
To toggle the 'on hold' flag of a line in the browser, double click on the browsers H (hold column). Placing an item on hold will stop it being overwritten during regeneration of the draft and will stop the line from being processed when posting returns.
Also see context (right mouse) menu options.

Editing a line in the browser
To edit a line in the browser, double click on it. The Edit Draft Return window will open. Here you can view the history of the title and enter the number to be returned, select the original invoice and amend other settings: see the Edit Draft Return window section below.

Posting
See the Post Returns section below for details.

Edit Draft Return window
To open the Edit Draft Return window, double click on a line in the browser of the Draft returns window. Here you can view the history of the title and enter the number to be returned, select the original invoice and amend other settings.



Editable fields
Draft returns fields
?	Qty: quantity being returned (can not exceed On Hand qty)
?	Hold (F6): toggle the draft return line on and off hold.
?	Consignment (F4): (if enabled) set the line as a consignment stock return.
?	Return reason: select a return reason from the drop down box. (Click the Repeat (F3) button to use the last reason used. Click the None (F7) button the clear the Return Reason field).
Note: Returns Reasons can be added/deleted and amended to ebility via Tables/Authority Tables/Returns Reasons. Returns reasons are primarily used to identify damaged, wrong supplied etc. SOR returns do not have to be labeled line by line in this manner.

Invoice details
When generating a draft returns list, the program will allocate the original supplier voice for each line of the draft. You can edit this invoice number here. While you can overtype the invoice number and date, it is easier to find the invoice in the Receiving History browser at the top right of the window. Double click on the browser line. The invoice number, invoice date and invoice cost price fields will be overwritten.

Master fields
You can change some title master fields here
Minimum stock
Maximum stock
Firm sale
Title master comment

Information fields
The various fields on this window will give you the data you need to decide on the quantity of stock to return. Most of the fields are self explanatory except the sales history numbers displayed at the bottom of the window:
The upper line is the monthly sales quantity for the previous 13 months.
The bottom line is the sales quantity for the last 12 sales periods, displayed from the left. These periods, designated in the system set up, are usually set at seven days.


Printing a returns authorisation request
After preparing your draft list of returns, you will need to print a returns authorisation request for each supplier.  This will list all the titles to be returned to the supplier, the return reason and the original invoice numbers, dates and pricing. You can have e-Comms email the requests to your suppliers if your supplier is setup with an email address and defined for EDI Pacstream or email. Pacstream does not support sending RAs but if there is an email address Bookscan will send these via email.

Open the Draft Returns Report Parameters window from the main menu:
Purchasing/ Returns/ Reports/ Draft.




Set your parameters
Uncheck the 'Include hold titles'.
Check the 'Include authorisation request'
Optionally check or uncheck the Email Request and Print Request boxes.
Select the supplier or tick the 'For all suppliers' check box.

Click the OK button to run the report. If you select the email option, the requests will be emailed to the suppliers if their email address is set in the supplier master, when
e-Comms runs.

Finalising your draft returns
When you have received your returns authorisation from your supplier, if you have not already picked your stock edit your draft returns for lines which the supplier disallowed the return or where the stock has been sold in the meantime. This is done ion the Draft turns window (see the Draft Returns window section above).
You can then print a list for picking the stock as per section above 'Picking list for Returns' and pick stock. You may have to edit the list again if items can not be found.
Once you have your list completed you can use Context (right mouse)menu in browse list to "Value" the draft. This will value unheld items at cost , showing GST , number of items etc for you to verify your action with the RA before posting.
Returns are posted in the Draft Returns window. This will create a credit claim on the supplier.

Posting returns
Open the window from the main menu: Purchasing/ Returns/Add/Change.
Select the supplier on the combo box.
Lines that are not to be included in the credit claim should be set to 'On hold' or deleted.
Click on the Post (F12) button. The Post Returns window will open.




Where applicable, enter the returns authorisation number, consignment note number and carrier, and any freight to be charged to the supplier.
If you wish the program to set the minimum stock level for the products in the claim to zero, tick the 'Zero minimum stock (F5)' check box.  This will prevent the items being added to the draft for re-ordering, if you are using 'Min Stock ordering' and haven't returned all the stock. Be careful using this function if you are doing damaged goods type returns as it will stop the item re-ordering un the future.
You can choose to have the program email the credit claims (if the supplier's email has been set in the supplier master).

Note: It is probably more appropriate to print and send the credit claim with the goods as the Supplier will not process the claim until the goods are received. Set the flag to print the claim. You should always retain a copy of a credit claim to ensure it is followed up with the Supplier (administration).

Click the OK (F12) button to create the claim.



Effects of posting
Posting has the following effects:
A credit claim is created (optionally, emailed to the supplier by Ebility e-Comms).
The stock on hand in the title master is reduced by the quantity of the claim.
The posted lines in draft returns are deleted.
The stock movement is added to the stock history file. This can be viewed on the Movement History tab of the title master.
The credit claim is stored in the returns history files from where it can be exported to the MYOB accounts package.
Optionally the minimum stock level in the title master is set to zero.
The credit claim is posted into the creditor transaction file (see diagram below)




Notes on the Creditors window:
·	The credit claim is highlighted in green in the browser.
·	The credit claim number ('7889') displays in the Reference column.
·	The returns authorisation number displays in the Description column.


	     Return to summary








.topic 2820


This is the window where you can enquire on past Credit Claims and edit some of the details if there is a variance in what was generated by the claim & what the supplier grants you in credit.

You can edit details in the header by clicking on the Edit Header(F7) button ot by pressing [F7].



Here you can edit the Return Date, Return Authorisation number, Consignment note number, Carrier details and Freight amount.

You can also double click on a line to edit, the Date, Invoice number, Quantity returned, Invoice cost of the item, Tax rate, Retail price, Return reason and Comment fields.



When you edit these fields, adjustments will be made in the Creditors module in the case of a cost or quantity change and also in the Title Master in the case of quantity.

.topic 2220
Note this area is only accessible for distributor/publisher configurations. It is not relevant for retailers. The procedures are written for the book and music industry, but can be simply adapted for any industry.

Book publishers and distributors usually sell their new titles to bookshops on a sale or return basis. The bookshops are able to return unsold stock only after a certain period since the release date (say, 90 days) and before a cut off date (say, 270 days after the release date). At some stage, say 180 days after the release date, the title is no longer considered new and moves to the backlist. Bookshop orders for backlist titles will have a different return rule, or may be non-returnable.

The Bookscan program allows you set up your products to handle this customer returns policy model or for variations on it.

We also need to cope with customer returns for other reasons:
·	wrongly supplied,
·	supplied damaged,
·	supplied with faulty printing or binding,
·	superseded by a new edition.

Customer returns - procedures summary

Setting up your customer returns policy
The customer returns policy is set on the Options tab of System Options.


Setting a title's returns status
As titles are created in the New Title window, users should set the Returns Status to either:
·	Sale or return
·	Backlist
·	No returns.
Where the return status is set as 'not set', it is treated the same as backlist titles.

The returns status can be amended in the Extra Fields tab of the Title Master window.

Globally managing return statuses
You can globally manage the return status of your titles in the RA Global Updates window.

Invoicing
As you invoice a customer's order, the returns status of each title at the time of invoice (or picking slip) creation is recorded against the invoice line. When a customer later sends in his returns authorisation request to return this product, it is the return status recorded in the invoice file that determines its eligibility for return, not the title current returns status. This allows you to alter the returns status of a product as it ages from 'sale or return' to backlist.

Returns authorisation
Returns authorisation requests from customers are processed in the Returns Authorisation window. As you enter each line of the request, the product's eligibility for return to checked against the returns policy. The program will advise you where a return is ineligible and you will have the choice of declining the return or authorizing it anyway.
Return request for other reasons such as 'received damaged' can also be processed.
Where the customer does not quote an original invoice number, the program will display all eligible invoices, allowing the operator to choose.
At the end of processing, the program will produce a returns authorisation form and the authorisation will be recorded against the original invoice and the title.
The program will prevent operators from authorising the return of an invoiced line more than once.

Processing credits
When authorised products have been returned to you, you can process the credits without re-keying. In the Order Entry window, on credit mode, you can append the RA into the credit note, amend it as required and post the credit. The credit will be recorded against the original invoice in the invoice lines table, preventing the chance of crediting the item twice.

Customer returns – detailed procedures

Setting up your customer returns policy
The customer returns policy is set on the Options tab of System Options.



The program allows two invoice date ranges:
·	'sale or return' items (new releases),
·	'other' (or backlist) items.
To allow returns on sale or return items, tick the checkbox. Then set the minimum number of days and the maximum number of days.
Similarly, set up returns on other items. If returns are not allowed other than on new releases, leave the second checkbox unticked.
You can also set the number of days after which an RA expires.

Setting a title's returns status
Each title will have one of four return statuses:
·	Sale or return
·	Backlist
·	No returns
·	Not set
Where the return status is set as 'not set', it is treated the same as backlist titles.

When an invoice is created, the current return status of each title is recorded against the invoice line in the invoice table. When a returns authorisation request is processed, it is this return status in the invoice table that is used to check whether a product is eligible for return, not the title's current return status.

The Returns Status is set using the Returns Status combo box in the New Title window and the Extra fields tab of the Title master.



Where the return status is set as 'not set', it is treated the same as a backlist title.

Globally managing return status
As new releases age, you will need to change their returns status from 'new release to 'backlist'. You could just change the setting in the Title Master window. Alternatively you can globally manage the return status of your titles in the RA Global Updates window. The RA Global Updates window is opened from the main menu: Purchasing/ Returns/ Returns authorisation/ Global updates.



When the window opens it will display all new release titles. To change the returns status of a line in the browser, select the new return status from the radio buttons on the left of the window. Now double click on the Ret column of the lines you wish to change. As you double click on a line, its return status will change and it will disappear from the browser.
Faster is to select all the lines in the browser you wish to change, open the context menu (by clicking the right mouse) and select 'Set selected to 'backlist'' (or 'not set' or 'firm sale') from the menu.

Using categories
Using Bookscan categories is a useful way to manage your new releases. Set each month's new release titles to a new Bookscan category – called say,  DEC08, JAN09, FEB09, MAR09 etc. As a month's new releases are ready to be removed to the backlist, you can load then into the RA Global Update window by selecting the category using the Load Category combo box in the top left of the window. The browser will fill all the new release titles from that month and you can easily change the status to 'backlist' as outlined above.

Returns authorisation
Returns authorisation requests from customers are processed in the Returns Authorisation window which is opened from the main menu: Purchasing/ Returns/ Returns authorisation/ Returns authorisation.



RA Enquiries
Select a customer in the customer field and the window will display:
·	A summary of the customer's outstanding RAs,
·	Their account summary,
·	Two browsers showing their current RAs.

Actions
·	Click on an RA in the top browser to display its lines in the lower browser.
·	You can view their old RAs in the browser by clicking the Show Old (F4) button.
·	If the customer has many RAs, you can type the RA number into the 'Find RA' field and press the enter key, to display that transaction.
·	Clicking the Expand Browser (F7) button will expand the lower browser to show more details.
·	To edit the lines of an RA, double click on it in either browser. The window will change to edit mode. See the Processing returns authorisation requests section below.
·	Using the context menu (shown open in the diagram above) to reprint, cancel or delete selected RAs or RA lines. You can also purge old RAs from here.
Note: to cancel an RA is flag it as 'no longer valid'. The delete it is to remove the RA completely (and irretrievably) from the RA table.
·	Reprint an RA form by clicking the Print RAs (F6) button. The RA printing parameters window will open, where you can reprint RA by setting a variety of criteria.


		
Processing returns authorisation requests
With a customer selected in the Returns Authorisation window, click on the New Authorisation (F12) button. The window will now display in RA input mode.



·	Enter the barcode of the first line of the RA request. The title details will display jus above the browser.
·	Enter the customer reference number (optional). This number will repeat for subsequent lines.
·	The RA quantity will default to '1'. Amend the quantity if required.
·	Enter the original invoice number which your customer should have provided. If this hasn't been provided, leave the field blank.
·	Select the return reason. The default is 'Sale or return'. Options are:
o	Sale or return – returning a product because they could not sell it.
o	Damaged - the product arrived damaged.
o	Faulty - faultily manufactured
o	Picking error - the correct product was invoiced but the wrong product despatched.
o	Order error – the wrong product was invoiced.
·	Enter any comments you wish e.g. 'Return title page only'.
·	Click on the Save (F12) button.

If you have entered the invoice number and the return reason is 'Sale or return', the program will check whether the line is eligible for return. If it is eligible, the line is saved to the browser, the edit line will clear and you can enter the next line or finalise the RA.

Invoice selection window
If you have not entered an invoice number or the invoice is not in the eligible date range or the return status of the product was set to 'no returns', the program will open the Invoice Selection window.



The left browser shows all this customer's invoices that have not been credited. Invoices outside of the allowed date range are show in yellow. Eligible lines are white.
The browser on the right shows the invoices you (or the program) have selected for this RA. If you had not entered an invoice number in the edit line, the program will select the oldest invoice (or invoices) for you.
Double click on a line in the right browser to de-select it; the line will move to the left browser.
Double click on a line in the left browser to select it and move it to the right browser.

Quantity fields
·	Requested – shows the original RA request quantity.
·	Allow – displays the total quantity for which invoices have been selected in the right browser.
·	Refused - displays the total quantity you have refused to accept.
·	To go – the requested quantity less the quantities allowed and refused.
To save the line, the To Go quantity must be zero.

The following diagram shows an RA where only part of the request has been allowed:



The customer wants to return 5 copies of this title. Invoices #12300 to #12303 are within the date range but #12359 is not. So the program has selected the four eligible invoices and has shown '4' in the Allow field and '1' in the To Go field.
The operator has clicked on the Refuse These (F7) button, causing the program to set the Refused field to '1' and the To Go field to zero. Because the Refused field is not zero, the operator must choose a refusal reason in the combo box before the line can be saved.

Invoice selection window- other features
·	Clicking the Categories (F6) button will display a pop up window listing all categories this title belongs to.
·	Clicking the Histories (F7) button will display a pop up window listing a complete list of all the customer's invoices for this title.
·	Clicking the Clear Invoices (F9) button will clear the 'selected invoices' browser.
·	For picking errors you will need to enter the barcode of the product that was actually sent. This will allow the warehouse to process the return properly.


Returns Authorisation window - Other features
Not our product
Sometimes a customer's RA request includes a product which you do not supply and so is not in your product master file. In that instance, as the operator enters the product code into the barcode field, a dialogue window will open:



Here you can enter the title and quantity. Clicking Save will add a refusal line to the browser with a refuse reason of "not our publication".

Appending invoices and RAs
If a customer is returning all of an invoice (perhaps an order was invoiced to the wrong customer), you quickly create an RA by appending the original invoice. Select the customer in the Returns Authorisation window, click on the Append Invoice (F8) button. A drop down list will be displayed of that customer's invoices. Select the invoice from the list and all the lines of the invoice will be copied into the browser. Amend any line you by double clicking it in the browser to load it into the edit line. Then finalise the RA in the usual.
You can similarly append an existing RA for a customer by clicking the Append RA (F9) button.

Finalising an RA
After all the lines have been entered, click on the Finalise (F12) button. This will open the RA Finalise window.



Options
·	You can select whether to print the RA form now. The program allows you to print by date range, filtered on the operator name, so you can batch print when you are ready to.
·	The expiry date is set using the default number of days entered in System options. You can change the expiry date for this RA by selecting a new date or overtyping the Days field.
·	You can set a contact to display on the RA form.
·	In the Saved Messages combo box, you can select one of your saved RA messages to display on the RA form. The message will display in the multi-line field. See the RA messages section below for creating new messages.
Click on the Post (F12) button to create the RA.


RA messages
RA messages which can be appended to your RA form are intended for you to write your standard returns conditions etc. You can add or edit these messages in the Saved Messages window which is opened from the main menu: Tables/ Authority tables/ Saved messages.



To add a message:
·	Click on the Add Message (F3) button. The header and the message fields will clear.
·	Type the name of the message into the header field. E.g. 'Standard RA conditions'.
·	Type the message in to the multi-lone field. The message can be of any length but remember that there needs to be enough room on the RA form to print it.
·	Click on the Save Message (F3) button to save the message.

Other features
·	Use the Next (F9) and Previous (F8) buttons to scroll through the saved messages.
·	You can hide a message so it will temporarily not be available to operators. This could be handy for say, Christmas messages which you can then 'unhide' in December.
·	Ticking the Show Hidden (F7) checkbox will allow you to view hidden messages.

Title master
In distributor/publisher configurations, the Details tab of the Title Master window has a returns authorisation field. This displays the number of current, re-sellable RAs for the product. Clicking the corresponding RA button will open the RA tab which has a browser displaying the all current RAs for this product.
Note: that the RA total on the details tab is a total of RAs which can be returned to stock. It does not include RAs for damaged or faulty stock.

Integrity check
Running the Stock Fields option in the Integrity Check window will recalculate RA totals on the title master. Remember that only the total of re-sellable stock will be displayed here. Faulty or damaged goods are not counted.

Processing credits
When authorised products have been returned to you, you can process the credits without re-keying. Open the Order Entry window from the main menu: Sales/ Invoice/ Invoice, credit, approval entry.
·	Select the customer in the Customer field.
·	Click on the Credit Note (F5) radio button to switch to credit mode.
·	Click the Save F12 button to open the processing view.
·	Click on the Append (F8) button and select an RA from the drop down box.



A pop up window will be displayed showing the lines of the RA. Deselect any lines you will not be crediting. You can also double click on the Qty column to overwrite a quantity.
·	Click the OK button and the RA will append to the browser.
In the diagram above, the operator has already appended the three lines of RA #2 and is in the process of appending RA # 3.
·	Finalise you credit not in the usual way.


.topic 1170

From the main menu, select Purchasing/Transfers/Transfers Out. The Transfers Out window will open.

Processing transfers out
Select the branch to which you wish to transfer stock in the Transfer to combo box.
Enter a reference number in the PO number field, if you wish, or leave as zero.
Select the method by which you wish to send the transfer - either EDI (via e-Comms) or by Disk.
Scan the barcode (or type in the ISBN)
Enter the Quantity to be transferred.
Click Save Line (F12).
To edit a line you have entered, double click on the line in the browser to open it in the edit line.
When all lines have been entered click Process Transfer (F12).
If sending via disk, a dialogue box will open. In the Data Path field select the path of the folder to save the transfer file to - this is a standard Windows selection field. Click on the button at the end of the field and browse to the transfer file folder (ie. on USB thumb drive), to select it.

Transfer History
To display completed tranfers, click on the Show History (F11) button. The browser will display all completed transfers out.

Filtering the transfers
Radio button  To all locations will display all transfers.
Radio button To selected location will allow you display only transfers to the selected branch. This will enble the Select order no. combo box where you can select a single transfer by transfer number.

Click on the End History (F11) button to end displaying history.


		

.topic 1160

Transfers inwards can arrive from two sources - either via e-Comms or via  a disk or network (ie. a USB flash drive).

Via e-Comms
When you run e-Comms, transfers are automatically loaded into the transfer inwards window where they can be processed as described in Step 3: Processing Transfers below:

Via disk
For transfers received via disk or network, you need to use the Import Transfers from Disk window. From this window transfers are  loaded into the transfer inwards window where they can be processed as described in Processing Transfers below:

From the main menu select Purchasing/Transfers/Import Transfers from Disk.
The Import Transfers from Disk window will open.
If the transfer files are on a USB drive, place it into a USB port.
In the Data Path field select the path of the folder containing the transfer inwards files - this is a standard Windows selection field. Click on the button at the end of the field and browse to the transfer file folder to select it.  (The folder, not the files.)
Click the Process Transfers (F12) button to load the transfer files from the folder into the Transfer Inwards window.

Processing Transfers

Inwards transfers are processed in the Transfers In window.

Step 1:
From the main menu, select Purchasing/Transfers/Transfers In. This will open the Transfers Inwards window. Unprocessed inwards transfers are  displayed in the browser.

Filtering the transfers
Radio button  From all locations will display all unprocessed transfers.
Radio button From selected location will allow you display only transfers from the selected branch. This will enble the Select order no. combo box where you can select a single transfer by transfer number.

History
Click on the Show History (F11) button to display processed (and partially processed) transfers in the browsers. Click the same button to cancel history view.

Step 2: Code changes	
Note that this refers to transfers via disk only.
Where a product code has been changed at the sending store but not at the receiving store, the line in the browser will be highlighted yellow. If you wish to update the product code locally, slecet the line in the browser and open the context menu (right mouse click) and select Code Change.

Step 3: Processing transfers

If you wish, filter the transfers you wish to process as in step 1.
Click on the Begin Processing (F12) button. The window will change colour and only only outstanding quantities will be displayed in the browser.
Double click on the line in the browser to  open the Edit Received Quantities window.
Enter the quantity to be received in the Received field.
Click on one of the Save buttons. The received and not received quantites are now displayed in the browser.
To process the transfer, click on the Process Transfers (F12) button.
The transfers will then be saved to the Receiving List against the Transfer supplier, code !TRA. Open the Receiving window, click the List button and post the receipts as you would for good inwards.

Shortcut
To receive all transfers displayed in the browser:

Click on the Begin Processing (F12) button.
Open the context menu (right mouse click) and select Receive all stock. This will fill the Rec column in the browser with the total quantity.
Click on the Process Transfers (F12) button.



.topic 2350

This window is located on the main menu in Purchasing -> Transfers -> Import From Disk.
This section allows you to manually load in stock transfers and title synchronisation files.



There are two types of import, as mentioned above, select from the two options of;
Process transfer files: Stock transfer files created using the 'by disk' method from the senders end.(will be 2 files, update(transfer number).DBF and update(transfer number).FPT )
Title synchronisation: Sync files containing product details that have been exported from any store. (Will be 2 files, tsupdate(number).DBF and tsupdate(number).FPT)

Append New Titles Only
When doing a Title synchronisation, you have the added option to only add titles that you dont already have in your system, otherwise it will add new and update the existing based on your settings for update.

To setup what does get changed when it does an update, from the main menu open Utilities -> System Options -> Stores Tab (shown below)
The options are listed below under the On Title Synchronisation section. If the option is checked, it will not update that filed on Title Synchronisation.



Next (while still in the Title Synchronisation window) click on the icon   to select the folder where the files you wish to import are saved.

Note: It is assumed that you have either received the files on a thumbdrive or saved the attachments from an email that was sent through to your site and that these files have been saved in the folder you will be selecting.


Click on the folder where the file are saved, then Click the OK button.

Next click the Proceed button, which will then check for any files that are of the type selected (Stock Transfer files and Synchronisation files)


This will then process the files based on your settings and the type selected. It will then show a message when done indicating what has been done. This example shows what a Title Synchronisation file will look like. On the main window (behind this message) you will see on the right hand side of the window the number of files it has processed, e.g. 1 synchronisation files.

Click OK button when done (it is already complete, but to clear the message to finish)

.topic 2340

This section is useful for multiple site stores where you wish to send the new titles entered on your site in a file to be loaded in at the other site. This can prevent double keying of products.

From the main menu, select Purchasing->Transfers->Title Synchronisation.


By default, as shown in the image above, will export all new products that have been added, since this was last run. If this has not been run before, it will export most of the products in your Title Master. It will also put the files into a zip archive (which makes it smaller for sending).

Settings for export

You can make changes to exclude any of the following (By using it to pick only what you wish to Include);

Department
Status
Suppliers
Imprints

Click on the button, e.g. Status.

The window that displays will show on the left-hand side All of the option, in this case Status and on the right-hand side what you wish to use for inclusion. (what remains on the left will be excluded)

Simply double click on items on the left-hand side and they will move to the right-hand side.

Click Save button when done.


When it returns to the main window, it will look like this.

This can be done in combination with all 4 of the options.

Product Export Count
To know how many products will be exported, before doing so, simply click the Get Title Count button, this will then display a message indicating the number of titles that will be exported if you save now.

Next Click Create File button when happy to save.



Next a window will appear to select the path to save the files to. Click this icon   to select the location (for advanced users, you can simply type the full path name in this box instead). If you have run this before, the location it was saved last time will show in this window, if this is the case, its best you keep using the same location (else make a new folder shown in the image below).


Select the folder you wish to save in, then click OK button.



When happy with the path, click the OK button.



What it will then finally show is a message to indicate that the file has been created, its name ( in this case tsupdate32493.zip )and also the number of products, or records saved in this file.

Note: 	The files saved are named tsupdate(number).DBF and tsupdate(number).FPT. If you have the zip file option selected as mentioned above these two files will be saved within the zip file, which will be called tsupdate(number).zip.
	You will need to transfer the files manually for import at the other site, (email, CD or USB drive) if zipped.  You can have e-Comms transfer the files by leaving the Zip file option unselected & saving to the Transfer -> Toho folder in your database folder.  You will still need to use the Import from disk window to import the synchronisation file.  It will be located in the Transfer -> Fromho folder in your database folder at that location.

.topic 1180

From the main menu, select Purchasing, then Transfers, then Reports and then click on the report you require.

Reprints
Use this option to reprint individual transfers.
Enter the transfer number by either typing it in the Transfer Number box or click on the down arrow   and select the number from the list.

Transfers out	
This lists a summary of all outbound transfers out within the dates you specify,
Select the start and finished dates you require and click OK.

Transfers in
This lists a summary of all inwards transfers within the dates you specify,
Select the start and finished dates you require and click OK.

For detailed information on these reports, click on the appropriate
link below:
Transfer reprints
Transfers out
Transfers in

	

.topic 1190
You can group individual products together and sell them as kits (pack). Each kit will have its own unique product code that can be scanned at point of sale or in the Invoice Entry window.
You can choose to have the sales recorded against either the components of the kit or against the kit itself. The latter is the default. You can set kits sales to be recorded against the components in the Sales tab of System Options.
All kits have a binding of KI and a main supplier of ^KIT.

Kits are managed in the Kits window. From the main menu select Purchasing, then Kits.
The upper browser of the Kits window displays all the kits listed in the title master.
The lower browser shows the components of the selected kit in the upper browser.



 Creating a kit:
In the Kits window click on the New Kit (F4) button to open the New Master Record window.
Enter the details into each field. Fields marked with an asterisk are mandatory.
Note: that the binding and main supplier fields have been completed for you.
Click the OK button when done.
You will then be invited to add components to the kit. You can either add them now or do it later
Adding components to a kit:
You can add components to the currently selected kit in the Add item to kit box.
Scan the barcode of the component into the ISBN field (or use one of the standard shortcuts or click on the F2 title product search button).
After selecting the product a dialogue window will be displayed asking for the quantity of this component in each kit.
Enter this quantity and click OK and the components is added.
Note that if you have already assembled stock against a kit you will not be able to add further components to the kit.

Setting the kit price
You can edit the kit sell price in three places:
In the New Master Record window when creating the kit.
In the title master as you would with any other product.
In the Kits window. Here the current sell price is displayed for the current selected kit. Also displayed is the total cost and sell price of all the components. You can use these to assist you in setting a price. To edit the sell price click on the Set Kit Price (F5) button and enter the new sell price.
Assembling kits
You can assemble components into kits in the Kits window.
Doing this will reduce the on hand level of the components and proportionally increase the on hand quantity of the kit stock.
The "Able to make" field displays the number of kits you are able to assemble.
Enter up to this number in the Assemble field and then click on the Assemble (F6) button.
Disassembling kits
The Assembled field displays the number of kits that are currently assembled.
Enter up to this number in the Disassemble field and then click on the Disassemble (F7) button.
Editing a kit
To change the quantity of a component in a kit, select the component in the lower browser.
Right click on it to open the context (right mouse) menu and select Edit Item.
A dialog box will open where you can change the quantity.
Note:  that you can only do this when no stock is assembled for the kit.
Deleting a component from a kit
To remove a component from a kit, select the component in the lower browser.
Right click on it to open the context menu and select Delete Item.
Note:  that you can only do this when no stock is assembled for the kit.


.topic 2790
Initiate an EFTPOS log on

Tells the EFTPOS communication software, (supplied by your EFTPOS vendor), to initiate a login with the paired pinpad.

Display EFTPOS utilities



EFTPOS settlements



Power Failure recovery

This is used when there has been a communication error between the PC & the EFTPOS pinpad.  It will resend the data for the transaction to the pinpad to complete the transaction.  If you have already manually run the transaction through the pinpad we recommend that you contact Barcode Solutions, and we will assist with clearing the stored data.  (This is done by opening the registry editor & clearing the data held in the Barcode Solutions \ LastEFTTrans entry.)

Display last transaction

Displays the data for the last transaction in the right half of the window

Reprint the last EFTPOS receipt

Reprints the last EFTPOS transaction receipt, (as against the last docket).

.topic 1200
A standard sale using the POS – a quick introduction:
Below is a step by step guide to performing a standard cash sale. For a more detailed summary with all options explained click on this link.

Step 1:	
Open the Cash Sale window from the main menu: Sales / Cash

Step 2:
Scan the barcode on the item being sold (or type in the barcode field and press Enter). The title will now appear below the barcode field.




Step 3:	
The quantity will automatically appear as 1. To change the quantity, just overtype it.
You can discount the line by typing in the discount as a percentage (e.g. for a 10% discount, type 10 in the Discount field).
Alternatively you can overtype the Price field with a new price. The program will turn this into a discount e.g. default price is $19.95. Overtype this with the new price of $15.00. The program will then display the price as $19.95 less a 24.81% discount.
Click the Save button (or press the F12 key) to save the line.
(To clear the line, use the Clear Line button or press the Escape key).

Step 4:	
Repeat steps two and three to record all items for the sale.
After saving each line the caption on the Save button changes to Finalise.
To conclude the sale, click on this Finalise button (or press the F12 key).
(To cancel the sale, use the Void Sale button or press the Escape key).

Step 5:	
The Tendering window will now open.




The Total Sale field will display the total value of the sale. Where the tender type is Cash, the amount will be rounded to the nearest 5c (Australia) or 10c (New Zealand).
The Tender type is set to the default - usually Cash or EFTPOS. In this screen shot the default is Cash.
(See below for details on the various transaction types)
To change the tender type click on the appropriate tender type button or press the corresponding function key.
The Amount Tendered field displays the sale total amount – for a Cash sale, overtype the amount tendered. e.g. a sale of $49.90 and the customer tenders $60 as payment. Type '60' into the Amount Tendered field.
Click the OK button (or press the Enter key) to close the tender window and complete the sale.
Alternatively to make a change before processing the sale by:
Clicking Backtrack button (or press the Escape key) to close the tendering window and return to the POS window.
Click Void Button to void the sale.

Step 6:	
A sales docket will now print and the screen clear for the next sale.
If the transaction type used requires the cash drawer to open, this will happen now.




If there is any change to give the customer, a window will be displayed showing the change amount. After giving the change, click the Transaction Complete button or press the Enter or Escape keys to close the Change window.

Cash Sales - Options

.topic 1210
Editing a Sale
To edit a sale line in the browse, use the mouse to double click the line. It will re-appear in the processing line so you can change quantity, price, discount or F7 to change it to a return. Once amended F12 will save the change. To delete a line from the browse, use mouse to highlight the line then use right mouse to access content menu and select Delete.

Singles/multiples
With the 'multiples' option set, when you scan a barcode, the system will let you increase the quantity, change the price or add a discount, and you have to press F12 (or keep pressing the Enter key) to save the line. For faster data entry, you can change this setting to "singles" by pressing the F9 key. Then when you scan a barcode, the item will be added directly to the browser, saving many key strokes. If you rarely discount or change prices, you may wish to set 'singles' as the default option.
To set Singles as the default when you open the point of sales window:
Access Utilities/System Options – on the Sales Tab tick "Default to Singles in POS" and save the setting.

Using the keyboard
The POS and Tendering windows can be accessed using either the mouse or the keyboard or a combination of both.

Escape key
In the POS window, the Escape key can be used to clear the customer field, to clear the barcode fields, to close any pop up windows (including the Tendering window), to void a sale and to close the POS window.

Enter & Tab keys
The Enter key can be used to move around the various fields on the POS window (as can the Tab key). Also, if the Multiples option is set, the Enter key will engage the Save button. So scan a barcode and press the Enter key three times and the item will be saved to the browser. Similarly in the Tendering window, the Enter key will engage the OK button to process a sale.

Voids
To cancel a sale which has been part processed, click on the Void button (or press the Escape key).The program will create a void transaction and print a void docket. If you attempt to close the POS window when it has a partly processed sale, the program will create a void transaction. Void transactions are listed on the Cash Book report printed at end of day. 	

Customers and sales
To record the customer against a sale, enter their customer code in the Customer field at any time during the transaction.

Reasons to record customer against sales:
For use in rewards and loyalty programs.
For marketing: using Ebility's category features, you can build up a buying profile of your customers and target advertising to them using mass mailouts and emails using the Ebility Modules/Customer Mailout module.
To record laybys, special orders and held items for a customer.
For account customers, you will be able to charge a sale to their account.

Finding a customer code
There are several ways to search for a customer.
In the POS window, click on the F3 button (or press the F3 key ) to open the customer search window. You will be offered five search methods:
Surname: enter all or the first part of a surname (e.g. to find a customer named Abercromby type 'aberc' into the Search field).
Full name: e.g. to find ABC Displays Pty Ltd, type in "abc disp".
Customer code: not useful in this circumstance.
Frequent shopper key: if you have issued a frequent shopper card, select this option and scan the card into the Search field.
Embedded: this is a free text search. Search for a part of the customer's name or address, or their phone number. For instance you could type into the Search field, "blue gum road" or you could enter their mobile number.



Handy shortcut
If you have just previously looked up the customer in another Ebility window or you are processing a second POS transaction for them, you can press the 'Alt F3' keys, or click the button, to load the last-used customer code into the customer field.	
	
Adding a customer at the POS
You can add a customer while processing a POS transaction. Click on the F3 button to open the customer search window where you can click on the New button. In the New Customer window complete whatever customer details you require.
(Alternatively if the Select Customer window is already open, click on the Add Record (F8) button to open the New Customer window).

Instant Rewards
If you have the "Instant Rewards setting enabled, you will see the number of "points" the customer has earned.  This is equal to the amount they have previously spent.  Once they reach the threshold set in the rewards program, it will instead display the amount of the reward they have earned.

In this case the customer has previously spent $39.



Once they reach the threshold set in the rewards program, it will instead display the amount of the reward they have earned.




Product searches
There are numerous ways to search for products in the master file. See the Title Master section for details. Briefly, in the POS window you can press the F2 key (or click the button) to open the Title Search window or you can perform various shortcut searches in the barcode field. E.g. to find the book 'Jelly on the Plate', type '/Jelly' in the barcode field to find any titles beginning with 'Jelly'. These shortcuts as well as (for books) searching the web for products is outlined in the Title Master section.

Handy shortcut
If you have just previously looked up the product in another Ebility window, you can press the 'Alt F2' keys, or click the button, to load the last-used barcode into the barcode field.	
	

Charging a sale to a customer's account
Where a customer is flagged as a debtor, sales at the POS can be charged to the customer's account. You do this at any time during the processing of the sale, by clicking on the Invoice (F6) button. The POS window will change colour to dusky pink to remind you that this is sale will be charged to account. If you have not yet entered a customer code, the Customer Search window will open where you can search for an existing customer code or create a new one. The Customer must have Debtors enable to process an invoice.
When you finalise the transaction, instead of the Tendering window opening, the POS prints either an A4 invoice or an invoice docket (the flag for this is set on the Sales tab of System Options) and the charge is placed on the customers account. At the end of the transaction, the POS window will clear and be reset for the next (standard) transaction,
At any time during the transaction, you may click on the Cash Sale (F4) button to change the transaction back to a standard sale.
Note: The Sales/Invoicing window is the preferred area to process invoices and credit notes as it has ability to apply comments, allows backordering, append facilities and to apply payments. The Cash Sales/Invoice option gives a quick means of processing a sale that was started in the Cash/Sales window and then requires conversion to charge on account but was not designed as the primarily invoicing screen.

Selling special orders
When stock for a special order has been received into stock, a special order slip is printed and stored with the item. When the customer arrives to collect the order you can process the transaction through the POS window.
Click on the Special (F8) button.
A window captioned 'Select Special Order' will open.




Enter the special order number in the Special Order Number field. (This field is a combo box which you can also click on to select from a drop down list of available special orders).
If you have not yet entered a customer code, the program will enter this data into the POS window's customer fields. The special order number will be displayed towards the top of the POS window. You can select further special orders by clicking on the Special (F8) button again.
Now scan the barcode of the ordered item. Any special orders deposits will be displayed and taken off the total value of the order.
You can also scan other items not on the special order.
When all items are scanned in, finalise the order as for a standard cash sale.
You may also turn the sale into a layby by pressing the Layby (F5) button.
Note
It is important to process the special orders using the Special (F8) button rather than just processing them as a standard sale. If treated as a standard sale, the special order is left as outstanding on the system.

Selling an item on Hold
	
You can reserve stock for a customer by putting it "on hold". If an item is on hold it must be taken off hold to sell it.

When you go to sell an item on hold, the system will pop-up the Holds window after you scan the item in a sale.
(Normally this will only occur when all remaining copies are on hold. However your system may have been set up to have the Holds window pop up whenever there is a held copy of a title).

The Holds window will display a list of customer for whom copies of this title are being reserved.

To release a held item for a customer, highlight the customer in the list and click the Release Hold Item button.

Click the Finished button to close the window.

Parking and recalling a sale
Parking a sale
At times you may have processed part of a (large) sale when the customer decides to go off to get more items or you may want to resume the sale at a different register. In these cases you can park the sale to be opened again late on the same day. To park a sale, simply click on the Park Sale button (or press 'Alt k'). The transaction will be saved to a temporary database table for recall later and the POS window will clear ready for the next transaction. The transaction can be recalled at any register in the store.

Recalling a sale
When the POS window is empty and there is a parked sale available for recall, the Park Sale button will be enabled and captioned Recall Parked. To recall the sale, click on the Recall Parked button (or press 'Alt k'). The Parked Sales window will open which lists all available parked sales, showing either the customer name, if a customer has been selected or otherwise the first product of the sale.




Use the arrow keys to navigate in the browser to the parked sale you want and click the Select (F12) button. (Alternatively, press the Escape button to back out and close the window).
When you recall the sale, the customer details, products pricing, layby, special order and invoicing information is loaded into the POS window and the Parked Sale window closes. (Note that the parked sale is then deleted from the Parked Sale database table. To re-park it, you will need to click the Park Sale button again).
You can now resume processing the sale.

Deleting a parked sale
When a parked sale is recalled, it is immediately deleted from the Parked Sale database table. To re-park it, click the Park Sale button again.
When the Parked Sale window is open, you can delete an unwanted parked sale, by highlighting the sale in the browser and clicking the Delete (F5) button.
When end of day processing is run, any outstanding parked sales are deleted.

Held stock
When you attempt to process a sale for an item where the product master shows no stock available, the program will check the Holds database table to see if that item has is being held for a customer. If it is being held, the program will not allow the line to be processed. However the Holds will window will open showing a list of for whom the stock is being held. In this window you can, if you wish, release the hold and proceed with the sale.

Dockets
When you process a sale, layby or invoice transaction, a docket will be printed at the end of the transaction.
The number of copies to print for each type of docket can be set in the Copies tab of System Options.
You can temporarily turn on and off docket printing by pressing the F11 button.
At the end of each docket print, the docket header is re-printed ready for the next transaction. If you need to re-set the header, open the POS window's context menu (click the right mouse in the window) and select 'Reprint Header'.
The docket greetings and footers, and layby instructions can be set in Utilities/System Options – System tab (use button 'other print settings')

Reprinting dockets
To reprint a docket, open the POS window's context menu (click the right mouse in the window) and select 'Reprint Docket'. A pop-up window will open.




Enter the number of the sales transaction. Click the OK button and the docket will be printed. Reprinted dockets are marked as 'reprinted'.
Note that the number of the last transaction for the register is displayed to the right of the Park Sale button.

Docket Search
If you do not know the docket number of the transaction you wish to reprint, you can search for it in the Docket search window. Open the POS window's context menu (click the right mouse in the window) and select 'Docket Search'.



The transaction may be stored in one of three database tables: today's sales, unposted sales (usually the previous day's sales) and sales history. Click on the appropriate radio button to select the table you want to search. The default is sales history.
For sales history searches, you can set a date range to display and you can also filter the sales by customer key and by product code. With today's sales and unposted sales, there is no filtering. Scroll though the browser and select the transaction you require.
To reprint a docket, double click on it in the browser. Alternatively highlight it and click the Reprint Docket (F12) button.

Operator sign in
Bookscan can be configured so that operators have to log in for each POS transaction. To enable this feature, set the flag on the Sales tab of System Options. With this flag set the operator will need to enter their initials before each transaction.



You can set a further flag here to use encoded initials. Here the operator must instead type in a three character password before each transaction. See the Security module for details on your security options.
If the operator log in window is closed, click on the Log In button in the Sales window, or the padlock icon on the toolbar to reopen it. Alternatively select Utilities/Log in from the main menu.

Marketing
Bookscan has a marketing module to allow you to record sales against customer locations (say post codes) and/or the source (usually what influenced the customer to make a purchase e.g. promotional flyers, direct mail marketing etc but you may set this up any way you wish). For more details on this functionality, see the Marketing section of the Modules chapter.

If this module has been purchased, the Marketing window will appear just before the Tendering window opens.




Enter the location and source information and then click the Select (F12) button and the Tendering window will open and you can proceed with the transaction as usual.
Options in setting up marketing include forcing the operator to enter the marketing data, turning off either the source or the location function and having default settings.





.topic 2710
Transaction Types

Buttons representing the various transaction types available are displayed across the top of the Tendering window.



Cash
Where the tender type is cash, the Total Sale field will display the total sale amount. The Owing field will be this total rounded to the nearest 5c (Australia) or 10c (New Zealand).
By default, the Amount Tendered field displays the rounded total. If required, overtype the amount tendered: e.g. in a sale of $17.99, the sale total will display $17.99, the amount owing and the amount tendered $18.00. If the customer tenders a $20 note as payment, type '20' into the Amount Tendered field. Click OK (or press the Enter key) and sale will be processed and the Change window opened to display change of $2.00.

Instant Rewards
If Rewards at the point of sale are being used, the amount available will be displayed in the top right corner of the window as the "Ins. Reward:" amount.  If it is only partially redeemed, the remainder will stay against the customer account, but may drop them below the threshold & not be able to be redeemed until they again exceed it.

Integrated EFTPOS
EFTPOS can be integrated into Bookscan (the preferred method) but it can also be used as a stand alone operation.  (Refer to the EFTPOS section in the Modules chapter for details in setting up integrated EFTPOS).

EFTPOS payments
To process an EFTPOS purchase, select the appropriate EFTPOS transaction type in the tendering window. If the Owing and Amount Tendered fields had been displaying a rounded amount, they will now be changed to show the un-rounded amount. Unless making a part-part with EFTPOS (see multiple transaction types below), do not change the amount tendered.
Clicking the OK button (or pressing the Enter key) will cause the EFTPOS pinpad's software to execute and this will now handle the transaction. (You may wish to refer to your pin pad manual at this point). A window will display on the screen telling you to insert your debit/credit card.



A similar message will display on the pinpad. Insert the card into the pinpad and the window (and pinpad) will ask you to select a card type. Select the card type on the pinpad.

For a debit card, you will be asked for a pin number. Have the customer enter the pin number into the pinpad and then press the Enter button.



The EFTPOS transaction will be processed direct to the bank and two EFTPOS dockets will print – a merchant copy and a customer copy. The pinpad software will now close, handing control back to Bookscan and the sale transaction will process, printing a standard sale docket.
For a credit card, you will be given a choice of a pin number or pressing OK on the pinpad for signature transaction. In the latter case, an EFTPOS docket will print for the customer to sign. Check the signature against the card and, if it is valid, press OK on the pinpad to complete the sale. Again, the merchant and customer copies will print and transaction finalised as for debit cards.

EFTPOS payments with cash out
The ability to give Cash Out is enabled in Utilities/System Options – Sales tab. Select define "Allow cash out at point of sale".

If a customer requires cash out with his purchase, process the transaction as outlined above except that after selecting the EFTPOS transaction type, enter the cash out amount in the Cash Out field. As you enter this amount, the Owing and Amount Tendered fields will increased accordingly



Click the OK button or press the Enter key, and the transaction will proceed as above.

Reversing an EFTPOS transaction
To reverse a transaction paid for with EFTPOS, process the refund transaction as normal – i.e. click the Returns F7 button and scan the barcode for each item to be refunded. Click the Finalise button. The Tendering window will open in refund mode, coloured pink. Select the EFTPOS transaction type. If there is a cash-out amount to be reversed, enter the amount as a positive number, in the Reverse Cash Out field, otherwise leave it blank. Click the OK button or press the Enter key and the pinpad software will run. Refer to your pinpad's documentation for processing a reverse transaction. When the pinpad finished the EFTPOS transaction, the EFTPOS merchant and customer dockets will print and  Bookscan will finalise the transaction, printing the refund docket.

Cash out only
You can process a transaction where a customer gets cash out without making a purchase. In the POS window, click the right mouse in the window to open the context menu and select 'Cash out (no sale)'.



The Tendering window will open with the purchases field set at zero. Select the EFTPOS transaction tender type and then enter the cash-out amount in the Cash Out field. As you enter this amount, the Owing and Amount Tendered fields will increased accordingly. Click the OK button or press the Enter key, and the transaction will proceed as above for a cash-out with purchases transaction.
To reverse a cash-out only transaction, select 'Reverse cash out transaction' from the context (right mouse) menu. The Tendering window will open in refund mode, coloured pink. Enter the amount to be refunded, as a positive number, in the Reverse Cash Out field and proceed as for a cash-out only transaction.

Stand alone EFTPOS
EFTPOS can be integrated into Bookscan (the preferred method) but it can also be used as a stand alone operation.
To process an EFTPOS purchase, select the appropriate EFTPOS transaction type in the tendering window. If the Owing and Amount Tendered fields had been displaying a rounded amount, they will now be changed to show the un-rounded amount. Unless making a part-part with EFTPOS (see multiple transaction types below), do not change the amount tendered.
Now process the EFTPOS transaction through you pinpad. When the EFTPOS transaction is complete, enter any cash out amount in the Cash Out field. As you enter this amount, the Owing and Amount Tendered fields will increased accordingly. Click the OK button or press the Enter key, and the sale transaction will be finalised and a standard sale docket will print.

Cheques
In the Tendering window, when you select a tender transaction of type 'cheque', the window will display four extra fields: Drawer, Bank, Branch and Cheque Number. The first three fields are required fields.



If the customer code has been entered in the POS window and that customer has previously made a purchase by cheque, these three fields will be automatically filled by the program. In that case you can overtype them if required. The all cheque details for the day's sales will be listed on the Daily Banking list which firms the last page of the daily cashbook report.
If the amount of the cheque is greater than the amount of the sale, enter the cheque amount in the Amount Tendered field. When the transaction is finalised, the change window will appear, showing the change as the difference between the amounts.

Tracked vouchers
A tracked voucher is a gift voucher whose number and outstanding value is recorded within the Bookscan program. You can view the amount outstanding and the history of the vouchers use in the Voucher Enquiry window.
In the Tendering window, when you select a tender transaction of type 'tracked voucher', the window replace the Amount Tendered field with two fields: Voucher Amount and Voucher Number.



Enter the voucher number in the second field. The Voucher Amount field will then display the amount outstanding on the voucher. Click the OK button or press the Enter key, and if the voucher is sufficient to cover the sale, the transaction will be finalised. If the voucher still has an outstanding amount after the sale, this amount will be displayed in a pop-up window. Write this new balance on the voucher.
If the voucher is insufficient to cover the sale total, click the OK button will cause the amount to be saved to the Transaction browser, the Owing and Amount Tendered fields reduced and the tender type reset to the default.



Select another tender type to complete the transaction. See 'multiple tender types' below.

Gift cards and untracked vouchers
You may find it useful to set gift cards and untracked voucher transactions to be of  type "require name". Where this setting is made, you will be required to enter a customer name (or other detail such as a voucher number) in a text field on the Tendering window. (Set up in Tables/Authority Tables/Transaction Types).




So in the Tendering window, select your transaction type.  The window will display a text field Surname below the Amount Tendered field. You can overtype the amount tendered if required then press the Enter or the Tab key to move to the Surname field. You can type up to 20 characters. Click the OK button or press the Enter key to finalise the transaction. If the amount tendered is greater than the sale amount, the difference is displayed as change in the Change window. If the amount tendered is insufficient to cover the sale, it becomes a part payment, and you will need to select another tender transaction to complete the sale - see 'multiple tender types' below. This surname field prints on the end of day Cashbook and maybe useful for reconciliation.

Multiple tender types
You can have as many tender types as you wish to cover an individual sale transaction. In the tendering window select the first transaction type. Overtype the amount in the Amount Tendered field. Click the OK button or press the Enter key. The amount tendered does not cover the sale, the tender transaction will be saved to the Transaction browser, the Owing and Amount Tendered fields will be reduced and the tender type reset to the default. Select another transaction type to complete the sale. In the example below, the customer has part paid for the sale with two tracked vouchers and is about to complete the sale with a cash payment.





.topic 1220

Customer returns are processed almost identically to a standard sale. Before scanning the barcode of the item to be return, click on the Returns (F7) button at the top of the screen or push the F7 key. 'Processing Returns' will be displayed in the Notices area of the window. The next scanned items will now be treated as a return. You can change the price, quantity and discount as in a standard sale. After you save a refunded line, it displays in the browser with a negative quantity.
To complete the refund, click on the Finalise button (F12). The Tendering window will be shown in refund mode as shown below. Select the tender type as for a standard sale and click the OK button to complete the sale.


Note
The POS window will revert to sales mode when you save a refunded line. So you will need to push the F7 key before each scan of a refunded item.

Exchanges
You can mix sales and refunds in the one transaction. In the case of an exchange, where the prices of the refund and its replacement are the same, the tendering will display will a zero amount owing. Just click OK to finalise the sale.

EFTPOS and refunds
If you are refunding using EFTPOS, select the EFTPOS transaction type in the tendering window. If reversing an EFTPOS sale that included customer 'cash out', and you wish to reverse the entire transaction, enter the cash out amount in the Reverse Cash Out field.


	       Return to cash sales help

.topic 1230
Laybys are handled in the POS in a similar way to standard cash sales. Note that laybys cannot be processed in the same transaction as a standard cash sale or refund.

Creating a layby
Select a customer in the Customer field in the usual way (i.e. enter the customer code, use back slash or other short cuts or use the F3 button).
Click on the Layby button (F5). The colour of the POS window will change to sky blue to remind you that this is a layby.
Scan the barcodes of the layby products as for a standard cash sale, changing the quantity, price and discount fields as required.
Click the Finished button (F12) when done.
The Tendering window will now open.



The Tender type will set the default for the POS
The Layby Deposit field and the Amount Tendered field will display the minimum deposit amount. This deposit is a percentage (set in the Financials tab of System Options) of the total layby amount. Over type this deposit amount if required.
The cursor will be in the Deposit field. To move to the Amount Tendered field, press the Tab or Enter key. For a cash deposit, overtype the amount tendered if required. Press the Enter key (or click the OK button) to conclude the layby.
The Tendering window will close, a layby docket will be printed, the POS window will clear and be reset for the next (standard) transaction, the cash drawer will open if needed and the Change window will display if there is any change.

Handy hint
If part of the way through a standard transaction, the customer decides to change a standard transaction to a layby, just click on the Layby (F5) button to switch it to a layby. If you have not yet entered a customer code, the Customer Search window will open where you can search for an existing customer code or create a new one.
Similarly if they change their mind and decide to pay the full price for the layby, click on the Cash Sale (F4) button to change the transaction back to a standard sale.


.topic 2650
Selling tracked vouchers
Tracked voucher are set up in the title master in the usual way but with the 'product type' set as 'tracked voucher'. You may have your vouchers printed with a barcoded product number on them or you may choose to set up your vouchers with an easy to remember product code such as 'VOU'. See the Title Master section for further details. To sell your vouchers through the POS, enter the product code in the Barcode field. The program will display the Voucher Entry window.



Enter the number of vouchers the customer is buying.
In the next field enter the first voucher in the sequence. The program will then display the final number in the sequence. If any of the voucher numbers in the sequence have already been sold, you will be prompted.
If you have a broken sequence of numbers, break them up into contiguous sequences or enter each voucher individually.
Click the OK (F12) button to save the line to the browser.
Then add any other purchases and finalise the sale as usual.






.topic 2580
Bookscan supports credit card-style gift cards that are used in conjunction with Ingenico EFTPOS and Payment Express EFTPOS. Gift voucher cards are set up in the title master like any other product and are sold through the POS in the usual. At the end of a sale involving a gift card, Bookscan connects to the EFTPOS machine. The new gift cards are swiped in the EFTPOS machine to have the card number set with the value of the card.
Note: You will require an Bookscan EFTPOS license to use this feature. Contact Barcode Solutions to obtain one.

Using electronic vouchers
·	Set up a product in the title master for each electronic voucher amount. The sell price should be set as the value of the gift card. Alternatively leave the sell price at zero and enter the value in the POS during a sale.
·	In the Categories tab of the Title Master, set the product type as gift card.
·	Sell the gift card as usual through the POS.
·	At the end of the transaction, the EFTPOS window will (re-)open.  Swipe the gift card and it will be loaded with the sell price of the card.
Redeeming cards
Create a new tender type for gift cards. Set the EFTPOS flag for the transaction to true.
In the tendering window, select the gift card transaction type and enter the card as you would a debit card.


.topic 2590
This function is now obsolete due to it being abandoned by the retailers.

Bookscan will now work with Graphicard style loyalty cards as used by A&R and Dymocks.
Note: You will require an Bookscan EFTPOS license to use this feature. Contact Barcode Solutions to obtain one.

Overview
Customers can be issued with a rewards card that is swiped when they make a transaction.
The total rewardable amount will then be displayed at the end of each sale. Users then swipe the card in the Graphicard terminal and enter the rewardable amount of the sale. If the customer has reached the appropriate reward level, the terminal will issue a voucher giving so many dollars off the next purchase along with any on-the-spot prizes won.

Setting up loyalty cards
Set up a product in the Title Master to be the default rewards card. Use this product to keep track of the rewards cards you have in stock.
Open the Options tab of System options and set the default Rewards Card to be this product code. Also on this tab set the price of the rewards card. E.g. say the cards are $10 when the (rewardable) sale is from zero up to $50, $5 for sales $50 and over and under $100 and free for sale $100 and over. Set the fields as follows:

Purchase up to 		50.00 		$10.00
Purchase below 	100.00 	$50.00

Selling rewards cards
See the selling special products section above for details.

Using a loyalty card
At the end of a transaction that has a rewardable sale amount, the rewards card
popup window will appear before the Tendering window opens.

If the customer has a rewards card, swipe the card in the popup window. The window will close and the tendering window will open. When the tendering window closes the Change window will display any change as well as the rewardable amount. This amount should be entered in the Graphicard terminal.
If the customer doesn't have a rewards card and wants to buy one now, click the backtrack button (or press the escape button) and add one to the sale.
If the customer doesn't have a rewards card and doesn't want to one, press the Continue button (F12).

Notes on loyalty cards
Rewards points and card numbers also print on the sale dockets.
Laybys are not rewarded until the final payment is made, though you can scan the card when creating the layby.

Advantages of using the loyalty card module
Bookscan will control the variable pricing of loyalty card sales.
The rewardable amount of each purchase is calculated and displayed on the screen and is printed on the sale docket.
Products flagged as 'no reward' will not be included in the rewardable total.
If a customer part pays for his purchase using a rewards voucher, this amount is deducted from the rewardable total.

Selling loyalty cards
To sell loyalty cards, you must first set up a product code for them in the master file. See the  section above for details on doing this.
Loyalty card selling prices can vary with the amount of the transaction. For example, you may set the card up to have a standard price of $10. If the customer spends between $50 and $100 in the same transaction, the price may drop to $5. If they spend over $100, the card is free. These prices are set on the Options tab of System Options.
See the Loyalty Cards section below for details on this functionality.

To sell a loyalty card, enter the loyalty card product code in the Barcode field in the POS window. A small popup window will be displayed. Scan in a blank card's barcode. The price of the card and the rewards dollars so far processed for this sale will be displayed.



If the card is to be free the product will be saved direct to the browser.
If it has a price it will you will be able to waive the charge by pressing the Waive button in the popup window.
If the customer makes further purchases in this transaction, the program will change the price of the card.







.topic 1240

Creating special orders

Step 1:	Open the Special Order Create window from the main menu: Sales/Specials/Create.

Step 2:	 Select a customer in the Customer field in the usual way - i.e. enter the customer code, use the F3 button to open the customer search window or the Alt F3 button to recall the last customer.

 Step 3: Enter the customer order number in the Order No. field.(if relevant)



Step 4:	
Enter the barcode in the ISBN field.
Alternatively you can search for a product by clicking on the Title Master F2 button to search and select or you can add a new title while on this window and once added select this.
Enter the quantity (defaults 1)
If a deposit is being taken, type the Deposit amount.
Select a Supplier if the field is blank (ie no supplier in the title you selected) or you can change the supplier when in this field.
A Comment can also be entered against each line.
A follow up date can be added.
Click the Save Line button (F12).

Step 5:
Repeat step 4 for each special order line.
Click the Save Order button (F12) to complete the order.
If a deposit has been entered, the Tendering window will open. Enter the transaction details in the same way as for a cash sale.



Options
Unknown ISBNs (More details here.)
·	If you don't know the ISBN, you can still put the order through.
·	Click on the upper Unknown button (F8) and then enter the product title and, if known, the supplier and author.
·	You can enter the actual ISBN and correct the other fields later. Click the link for details.
·	Clicking on the lower Unknown button (F9) will display Misc(ellaneous) as the supplier.

Note: If you use the Unknown ISBN option – the special order is not activated until you link it to an active title in the database. This is done in Sales/Special/Replace. You should discuss the 'Best practice' with management as customer orders can easily be misplaced if this is used without understanding the necessary follow-ups required.

Print
You can chose whether to print the special order by checking the Print check box (F4) .

EDI
You can choose whether to use email to send a special order advice of the order being placed. This defaults on, for any client who is setup for EDI (Customer/Finance tab). If you do not want to send a placed order confirmation via email, (untick) F6 to turn the option off.

Standing Orders	
Check this box for standing orders.(For example for a magazine).
			
Acquisition No   	
Customer acquisition number: check the Standing Orders check box to enable this field.

Selling a special order
Special orders sales can be processed individually through the POS and Order Entry windows, or can be batch processed through the Order Entry window.

Selling a special order through the POS
·	Open the Cash Sale window from the main menu: Sales /Cash sales.
·	Click on the Special (F8) button. A window captioned 'Select Special Order' will open.



·	Enter the special order number in the Special Order Number field. (This field is a combo box which you can also click on to select from a drop down list of available special orders).
·	If you have not yet entered a customer code, the program will enter this data into the POS window's customer fields. The special order number will be displayed towards to top of the POS window. You can select further special orders by clicking on the Special (F8) button again.
·	Now scan the barcode of the ordered item. Any special orders deposits will be displayed and taken off the total value of the order.
·	You can also scan other items not on the special order.
·	You may also turn the sale into a layby by pressing the Layby (F5) button.
·	When all items are scanned in, finalise the order as for a standard cash sale.

Note: it is important to process the special orders using the Special (F8) button rather than just processing them as a standard sale. If treated as a standard sale, the special order is left as outstanding on the system, and will leave a hold on the title causing problems later.  The Special order will then have to be Finalised from the Sales/Special/Enquire window.


Selling a special order through the Order Entry window

The client must be a Debtor to charge a special order to invoice.
Access Sales/Invoices/Invoice, Credits, Approval entry
Select client
System should default F4 Standard Invoice as the default transaction type.
F12 to save, moves you to the processing screen
You can append specific numbers or if there is more than one type of transaction you get an All option – select the appropriate action
There is a button on this screen (top center labeled "Append F8") This allows you to append special orders, approvals, quotes. Proformas & consignment stock (if enabled) into an invoice. As the window appends multiple transaction types, you must select the Special you wish to append from the dropdown menu



The software will display a window of items on that special order.



If you wish to not include a line or reduce the quantity you wish to append you can double click to untick the Use column to not append or in the qty field to append and quantity to process. Otherwise Ok will append the items to the invoice. The system will present this window for each order # if you used All option
Note: There is no facility to delete a special order line after appending it into an invoice so this is where you exclude it from the invoice.


The items will append into the invoicing screen as below:



If you wish to amend any lines – double click item into the processing line – change price, discount or add a comment – F12 to process the change.
Process as for standard invoicing.
Deposits show as payments e.g.  in this example $25.00 has been taken on the special orders being processed so the posted invoice will show only $160.02 owed & 29.00 as deposit recoup.
Note: If a deposit was taken on the special order, this displays in the posting screen.



There is a Right mouse Special order append in the order processing screen
The F8 Append button is to append records linked to the client name you are invoicing. The Right Mouse appends allow you to append from other clients specials, approvals, quotes and proformas. This isn't a common action but an example might be where the item was ordered for the school by a teacher and the school wants to be charged for the teachers special order.  (ie it was ordered against the teachers name, but the school is being invoiced.)


Special order  - client order numbers
If the client order number is entered in creating or later editing the special order. The items appended to the invoice grouped by client special order number


Batch processing special order sales the Order Entry window
This feature of Invoice Entry enables you to quickly invoice all special orders for all customers where stock has been received. The process loads in turn, into the header, each customer who has special orders where the stock has been received.
The special order lines for the first customer are automatically copied into the browser. You can then finalise the order in the usual way by clicking on the Finalise button. The invoice will then be created and the next customer and their special orders are loaded. Use the Skip button to skip processing any customer.



Processing Details
Header window
·	In the Invoice Entry window ensure that you have not selected a customer and that the Transaction Type is set to Standard Invoice.
·	Click on the Start Batch Alt F8 button to begin processing.
·	The number of customers to be processed and the total number of special order lines will be displayed.
·	The first customer with special orders will be loaded.
·	Make any changes you require in the header (e.g. re-set the terms) and click on the Save F12 button.

Browser Window
·	The browser showing that customer's special orders will now be displayed.
·	Amend or delete any lines you need to and add further lines to the invoice if required.
·	Click on the Finalise F12 button.

Footer window
·	Make any changes or additions you require to the footer window (e.g. add a freight charge) and click on the Post F12 button to create the invoice.
·	The next customer will now be loaded and you can process their orders in the same way.
·	To skip a customer, click on the Skip Customer Alt F9 button; the next customer will be loaded in its place.
·	Add any time you can use the End Batch F8 button to stop processing.
·	When the last customer with available special orders is finished, batch mode will end automatically.


.topic 1250
 	
Open the Special Order Enquiry window from the main menu: Sales/Specials/Enquire.

Looking up special orders
You can lookup special orders in four ways:

Enquiry by special order number:
In the Special Order field, type in the order number or click on the down arrow   and select it from the drop down list.
All the lines on the special order will be displayed in the browser.
	
Enquiry by customer:
Select a customer in the Customer field in the usual way.
All the special order lines for the customer will be displayed in the browser.
The total outstanding special order quantity for the customer and the total value, at current sell price, of those lines is displayed
	
Enquiry by customer order number:
In the Cust Order No field, type in the order number or click on the down arrow   and select it from the drop down list.
All the special order lines for that order will be displayed in the browser.

Enquiry by ISBN:
Type the ISBN into ISBN field.
All the special orders for that ISBN will be displayed in the browser.

Handy shortcut
In Customer Order Number mode and in ISBN mode, double clicking on a the line in the browser will switch to Special Order Number mode with the browser displaying just the details of that special order number.



Special order enquiry window
Browser Display
The browser will display three quantity fields:
Qty	The amount ordered.
Rec	The quantity that has been received.
Del	The quantity that has been invoiced.

Actions
After selecting a special order using the Special Order combo box, you can perform the following actions by clicking the relevant button:

Finalise
If you have sold a special order without either using thee Special Order function in Cash Sales or appending it to an invoice, the special order will still show as waiting to be processed. To correct this, click on the Finalise (F5) button. This will update the Del(ivered) field of the special order.
If there is a deposit outstanding on the special order, you will be given the opportunity to refund it. If you do not wish to, ie customer defaulted, you can set the refund to zreo by overtyping the amount displayed.

Delete Order
Highlight a line of the order in the browser and click on the Delete Order (F6) button.
If there is a deposit outstanding on the special order, you will be given the opportunity to refund it. If you do not wish to, ie customer defaulted, you can set the refund to zreo by overtyping the amount displayed.

Delete Line
Highlight the special order line in the browser and click on the Delete Line (F7) button. If there is a deposit outstanding on the special order, you will be given the opportunity to refund it.

Edit item	
Clicking on the Edit Item (F8) button will open the edit window.
Here you can change:
Order comment
Quantity received
Order Quantity
Customer order number
EDI and Print flags.
You can also add a deposit in this window.
 In Special Order Number mode and in Customer mode you can access this window by double clicking on a line in the browser.

Adding a deposit
If the customer pays a deposit, you can enter it here. Enter the deposit in the Add to Deposit field. You will be asked to complete tendering details in the Tendering Type window as you would for a normal cash sale.

Add line
Clicking on the Add Line (F8) button will open the Add Line window.
Enter the line details as you would in Special Order Create and then click the OK button.

Print Docket
With the special order line highlighted in the browser, click on the Print Docket (F11) button to reprint a docket.

Context Menu
Displaying title, supplier and customer details 	
Right click on the window and chose View title master, View supplier master or View customer master from the displayed menu.


.topic 1260
	
Step 1:	
From the main menu, click on Sales, then point to Specials and click on Enquire.
The Special Order Enquiry window will now open.

Step 2:	
In the Special Order field, type in the order number or click on the down arrow     and select it from the drop down list.
All the lines on the special order will be displayed in the browser.
If you don't know the special order number, you can find it using the three search fields. See Special Order Enquiries.

Step 3:	
To delete a line from the special order:
	    · Highlight the line by clicking on it.
	    · Click the Delete Line button.
	    · Click on Yes to confirm the deletion.
			
To delete the whole order:
	    · Click the Delete order button.
	    · Click on Yes to confirm the deletion.

If there is a deposit outstanding on the special order, you will be given the opportunity to refund it. If you do not wish to, ie customer defaulted, you can set the refund to zreo by overtyping the amount displayed

.topic 1270

You can create a draft special order for a title whose ISBN you have not yet been able to identify. This allows you to create a special order at the POS and then later, when you have more time, look up the ISBN.

Creating the draft special order
Open the special order create window and enter your customer in the usual way.
Click on the Unknown (F8) button (or enter an asterisk in the barcode field and then press the Tab or Enter key). A pop up window will be displayed where you can enter an approximation of the title and the author. The title field is a required field.



The program will insert an asterisk for the barcode and set the supplier to the miscellaneous supplier (code 'MISC'). You can change this to the actual supplier if you know it. To change it back to MISC, click the Unknown (F9) button.
You can mix known and unknown titles on a special order.
To reopen the Title/Author pop up window of a line, double click on the line in the browser.
After entering all the lines of the special order, save it in the usual way.

Processing draft special orders.
·	Open the draft special order window from the main menu: Sales/Specials/Replace.
·	The window will display all outstanding draft special orders in the browser.
·	Double click on the line you wish to process.
·	The line will be copied onto the Suspected Title and Suspected Author fields and the cursor will move to the Enter Replacement ISBN field.
·	Type in the replacement ISBN or click the F2 button to open the title master to search for the title. (If you have just added the ISBN to the database, or just looked it up, you can instead just click on the Recall button).



·	Once you have found the title, click the Replace button. It now becomes a normal special order.
·	If you already have stock of the new title, the Allocate from Stock window will open allowing you to allocate stock against this order.


.topic 1280

From the main menu, click on Sales, then point to Specials and then click on Print.

Customer reports

These produce Special Order Status Reports for customers.
These are letters addressed to customers listing the outstanding titles on their special orders.

All
The letter lists all special orders for a selected customer.
			 	
Single
Select a single special order.
Click on the    in the special order box and select the order number required  from the list displayed.
		
Category	
Report to all customers with outstanding special orders in a selected category.

Other Reports

Status  	
Creates a report in customer order, reporting outstanding special orders for titles with a selected print status (eg NYP).
	
All	
Produces a summary of all special orders.
Parameters:
	· Order  numbers greater than.
	· Report unsupplied items only option.
	· Sort by either customer or by special order number.

Not Found
Lists all special orders where the ISBN is unknown.

Overdue	
Reports on overdue special orders.
Parameters:
	· Start and finish dates.
	Click here for assistance with changing dates.
	· Standing orders.
	Select whether to include or exclude standing orders or whether to report on them exclusively.			
	· Supplier.
	To select multiple suppliers, hold the control key down while clicking on the required suppliers.
	Click the Select All button to report on all suppliers.


.topic 1290

Periodically you should remove old, completed special orders from the database:
·	Open the Purge Special Orders window from the main menu: Sales / Specials / Purge.
·	In the displayed window, select the date from which to purge filled special orders.
·	Click the OK button. You will be asked to confirm before the program will perform the deletions.
·	Only special orders which have been finalised will be deleted.


.topic 203

Open the Layby Enquiry window from the main menu: Sales / Laybys / Layby Enquire.

Displaying Laybys
You can search for laybys in three ways:

Layby number
Select the layby number.
A list of all products on that layby number will be displayed.

Customer
Select a customer in the Customer field in the usual way (i.e. enter the customer code, use back slash or other short cuts or use the F3 or Alt F3 buttons).
A list of all titles on layby for the customer will be displayed.

ISBN
Scan or type in the barcode in the ISBN field. All laybys for that product will be displayed.
Note that in this mode, you can't delete or make a payment on a layby.

Handy shortcut -   Double clicking on a line will switch to Layby Number mode with the browser displaying just the details of that layby number.
	

		    	
Options
Payments
·	In the browser, select therequired layby.
·	Click on the Make Payment (F7) button.
·	The Tendering window will open displaying the total amount owing in the Layby Deposit field.



·	If the customer if not paying the full you can overtype this amount.
·	If the customer is not paying in cash, select a tender type.
·	Enter the tender amount in the Amt Tendered field.
·	Click on OK (or press the Enter key) to complete the transaction.

Deleting
·	In the browse, select the required layby.
·	Click on the Delete (F4) button.
·	If there are outstanding payments on the layby, the Tendering window will open displaying the payment total as the amount to be refunded.
·	If not giving a full (or any) refund you can overtype this amount with the actual refund.
·	If not refunding in cash, select a tender type.
·	Click on OK (or press the Enter key). The Tendering window will close.
·	A pop up window, Cancellation Comment will now be displayed showing a default comment of the refund amount, cancellation date and operator.  Overtype or add to the comment if you wish and click OK or press the Enter key.



·	The cancellation is now complete. If there is cash refund for the customer, the Change window will now be displayed

Payment History
·	In the browser, select the required layby.
·	Click on the Payment History (F5) button.
·	A window will open listing each payment.



Handy shortcut -   Except in ISBN search mode, double clicking on a the line will have the browser will also open the history window.

Docket Reprint
·	In the browser, select the required layby.
·	Click on the Print Docket (F6) button.

Layby Archive
·	This allows the viewing of completed laybys for viewing purposes only.
·	Click Show Archive (F9) button.
·	To return to the current laybys click Show Current (F9).


Purge Laybys

This will remove all Finalised laybys that are older than the specified data

.topic 1320
In the Order Entry window you can process customer orders, creating:
·	invoices,
·	picking slips,
·	approvals (or inspection copies),
·	consignments outwards,
·	customer quotations,
·	pro forma invoices.

Orders can be entered by:
·	manually typing them in,
·	importing from your web site, (e-Web module)
·	importing from EDI invoice file, (wholesale)
·	appended from approvals, special orders, quotes and pro forma invoices.

Also in the window, you can also process customer returns and other credits. These credits can be:
·	manually entered,
·	appended from invoices (allowing you to easily reverse an invoice)
·	appended from returns authorisations.  (wholesale)
(Not all users have access to all these functions. It will depend on how your system is configured).

ORDER ENTRY WINDOW

The Order Entry window is opened from the main menu: Sales / Invoices / Invoice, Credit, Approval Entry.
Below is an outline of how to process customer orders

HEADER DETAILS

Step 1: Select the customer	
Select a customer in the Customer field in the usual way – enter the customer code in to the customer field, click the F3 button to open the customer search window or click the Alt F3 button to recall the last customer.
·	The customer's name and default details will be displayed.
·	Details on their account balance are displayed - current, 30, 60 and 90 days.
·	For the distributor module, a summary of the customer's current orders and backorders is displayed.
·	For tax exempt customers, 'Tax Exempt' will be displayed in a red field.
·	For customers on stop, 'Stop' will be displayed in a red field and you will be unable to proceed further.
·	If the customer has exceeded their credit limit, 'Limit Exceeded' will be displayed in a red field. You will still be able to create an invoice.
·	Customers who are not account customers will  will only be able to have Approvals and Quotations created for them unless the Mailorder flag is set in the Customer Master / Detail tab. When searching for a customer, account customers (debtors) are highlighted in aqua in the Customer drop down box.

Step 2: Transaction header details
Now enter the header details for the transaction:
Enter the customer order number (optional). Order numbers can also be entered line by line.
You can change the:
·	customer contact:  the combo box lists all of that customer's contacts,
·	sales rep: the second sales rep field is for use where you have separate reps for different product types (e.g. books and music),
·	sales terms
·	delivery address: You can use the arrow buttons to select alternate delivery addresses or you can add a new address,
·	header discount off the transaction total. (You can optionally enter a discount off the total value of the transaction. This can also be entered (or changed) in the footer window. If a discount is entered here then the running total displayed as you are entering the order lines will reflect the discount. If the discount is dependent on the value of the invoice, you would enter it in the footer window).
	
Step 3: Transaction type	
In the Transaction Type radio button group select the transaction type you require:
·	Standard invoice is used to process customers' standard orders. It is used to produce an invoice, picking slip or forward order.
·	Credit note is used for processing customer returns and correcting invoice errors.
·	Approval is for sending out goods on approval to customers.
·	Consignment outwards is available only with the Consignment module. It is used for sending goods on consignment to retailer customers.
·	Pro forma invoice will create a pro forma invoice. It will not reduce your stock levels.
·	Quotation will create a customer quotation. It will not reduce your stock levels.

Step 4: Transaction mode	
In the Transaction mode radio buttons group select the required option:

Invoices, approvals and consignment orders

Retail configuration
·	Stock adjusting: the transaction will reduce stock and create a standard invoice, approval advice or consignment advice.
·	Charge only:  (invoices only) the transaction will not reduce your stock levels but will create an invoice. It can be used to correct undercharges on an invoice.

Credit notes
·	Return to stock: the transaction reduce stock and create a standard invoice.

Distributor/publisher configuration
·	Picking slip will produce a picking slip for the warehouse (or back office) to process. The transaction will reduce your stock.
·	Already sent will create a standard invoice, approval advice or consignment advice and reduce the stock level.
·	Charge only: (invoices only) the invoice will not reduce your stock levels but will create an invoice. It can be used to correct undercharges on an invoice.
·	Forward order will create a picking slip to be processed at a future date. It will reduce your stock levels.

Credit notes
·	Return to stock: the transaction reduce stock and create a standard invoice.
·	No stock movement: the transaction will not reduce your stock levels. This option can be used to correct overcharges on an invoice or for crediting goods lost in transit.

Step 5: Saving/displaying the header
When you have finished with the header, click on the Save button (F12).
At any time you can return to the header by clicking on the Show Header button (F11).

Important option
You can quickly and easily batch invoice all your special orders here. See the Batch processing section of the Special Order chapter for details.

ENTERING THE ORDER

Step 6: Processing a line
·	In the ISBN field: scan the barcode or type in the ISBN. Alternatively you can use either one the various shortcut title searches, the F2 title search button or the Alt F2 button to recall the last barcode used.
·	The Order No field: for the first line this will display the order number entered in the header. If you enter a new order number, subsequent lines will default to this new number.
·	In the Order Qty box, enter the quantity ordered.

Retail configuration
·	In the Supplied box, enter the quantity you can supply.
·	Where their insufficient stock to fill the order line, you will be given the option to put the item on special order when you save the line to the browser. See below in the 'Backorder' section of 'Options'.

Distributor/publisher configuration
·	In the Supply box, the quantity you can supply will be displayed.
·	Any backordered quantity will be displayed in the B/Order field.
·	You can apply a discount against a single line here. (To apply the same discount for the whole sale, do it in step 11).
·	You can also add a Comment against the title here.
·	The running total of the transaction will display in the Order value field.
·	Click Save (F12) to save the line to the browser. Alternatively click Clear Line (Esc) to delete it.

Step 7: Displaying the footer window
Repeat step 7 for each line of the invoice. Click Post (F12) to open the footer window.

OPTIONS
 Editing
To edit any line you have saved, double click on the line in  the browser. The line will be copied into the input line in the header.
Overtype any changes you want to make and click on the Save button.
To delete a saved line, right click on it in the browser and select Delete from the drop down menu.

Free text
To add a message line to an order, type an asterisk ( * )  into the barcode field.  The free text line will appear. Type in your message and then click on the Save button (F12).

Backorders
Backordering is enabled by checking the Auto Backorder checkbox in the Copies tab of System Options.
When this flag is set, a special order (backorder) will be automatically created during invoice posting if the Supplied quantity is less than the Order quantity.  There is a option F7 to display the Status of the title on such lines – to give advice on the printed invoice copy and update the title master status. If you wish to use this Status option you should ensure the Status "Backorder" column is ticked on all status that you wish to backorder on (Tables/Authority Tables/Status window by editing the status and ticking "all backordering' or alternative putting cursor over the backorder field in the list against each title and double clicking).


Faster input
For faster input where you are processing single quantities with no discounts or line comments and with the same order number, set the Singles (F6) checkbox to true. Then simply scan or type in the barcode of each product and it will be saved automatically to the browser.

Appending
When invoicing, you can append approvals, special orders, pro forma invoices and quotations.When entering a credit note, you can append an invoice to reverse it.
Wholesale (distributor/publisher configuration only).
Note that to append an approval you must select invoice type 'Charge Only', as the stock will already have been removed from your inventory.
When entering a credit note, you can append an invoice to reverse it or from a returns authorization.


How to append a transaction
·	Click on the Append button.
·	The Append From combo box will be displayed. This will display all the transaction numbers for this customer that are available to be appended into this transaction:
·	special orders where stock has been received,
·	quotations,
·	pro forma invoices,
·	approvals ( if 'Charge Only' has been selected)
·	invoices,
·	return authorisations.



·	Select the transaction you wish to append (e.g. Quote 367425 )
·	A pop up box will be displayed showing all the lines that can be appended.
·	To de-select a line double click on the Use column.
·	To reduce the quantity to be appended, double click in the Quantity column and overtype it. Note that for approvals, you will not be able to edit the quantity.



·	Click the OK button or press the Enter key and the selected lines will be copied into the browser. You can then edit any line by double clicking on it to copy it into the edit line.
·	Click Save (F12) to save your changes.

Appending another customer's transactions
The Append From combo box display displays only the approvals, specials etc for that customer. To append transactions from another customer, right click on the window to open the context menu and select one of the five Append options.

Results of appending
·	Special orders: when the invoice is posted, the system will update the special orders file to show that special order as invoiced.
·	Approvals: when the invoice is posted, the system will update the approval file to show that approval as invoiced.
·	Invoices: appending an invoice to a credit note. On posting, the program will automatically allocate the credit against the invoice in the debtors file. You can turn off this feature for individual customers by setting the 'no auto allocate' flag on Financial tab of the customer master.

Backorders, stock availabilityand due dates
Distributor/publisher configuration only
You can set a stock availability message against each status type in the Status Maintenance window (main menu: Tables/Authority tables/ Status).
The message will print as the backorder reason against each backorder line of your invoice. For example you may set 'temporarily out of stock' against the 'active' status.

In the Order entry window, this message displays in red on the edit line.


You can edit this field and set a due date for the delivery by clicking the F7 button. This opens the Availability pop-up window. Set the due date and a new availability message and click the OK button.




ENTERING THE FOOTER DETAILS

Step 8: Footer details
·	Apply a discount off the sale total.
·	Add a freight charge.
·	Add a surcharge.  (If wholesale)
·	You can add up to three lines of header Comments.

Step 9: Applying payments
To apply a payment click on the Payment button (F9). This will open the Tendering window.



·	The default transaction type will be that set on the Financial tab of System Options.
·	The Purchases, Total Sale, Owing and Amount Tendered fields will display the sale total including backorders.
·	If there are backorders, the total excluding backorders is displayed just above the Amount Tendered field. To accept payment for just the lines in stock, click on the Use button. (Use button will act as a toggle between including and excluding backorders). In the retail configuration, the backorder will take the form of a special order. Any payment for it will be stored as a deposit on the special order.
·	The Tendering window process is the same as that in the POS window. Refer to that section for details.
·	Note: for non-debtor customers the invoice must be paid in full to process. You will know that this is required by the Required message, as shown in the image below:



Step 10: Print options
·	Print Preview: choose this option when you are processing single quantities of goods with no discounts or line comments and with the same order number. Simply scan the barcode of each product.
·	Batch print: when the box is unchecked invoices are printed as they are posted. When ticked, invoices will be printed when you close the window at the end of the session. You can also start the batch printing by opening the context menu (right mouse click anywhere in the window) and selecting 'print batched transactions'.
·	Carton labels: if you wish to print carton labels, tick Print checkbox. For more than one label, overtype the label quantity in the 'No:' field. You can print more carton labels after you have posted by opening the context menu (right mouse click anywhere in the window) and selecting 'reprint invoice labels'.

Step 11: Posting
·	Click the Post button (F12) to post the transaction.
·	If the customer is not a debtor and full payment has not been entered, the Tendering window open allowing you to record the payment (See Step 10 above.)
·	When the invoice has posted a pop up window will display with the invoice number.
·	For users of marketing module upon posting it will display the marketing window. See the Point of Sale chapter for details of the Marketing window. Note: the marketing window will only display for invoices and credit notes.









.topic 2740
Web orders are picked up from your web site by Bookscan's e-Comms program. e-Comms stores the orders in the Bookscan database and  displays them in the Web Orders window. From the Web Orders window you can manage your web orders, processing them without re-keying.

SETTING DEFAULTS
Prior to downloading orders from the web site, you my choose to map the web site transaction types to Bookscan types. This only takes a few minutes.
Open the Web export window, open the context menu, (right click),  and select "Set Defaults". Then click on the "Web transactions" [F11] button to open the following window:

Enter each of the transaction types in the order they are displayed on your web site. The numbering and order are important.
Those transactions that are made through a gateway on your web site must have the gateway checkbox ticked.
Where relevant, transactions should be mapped to Bookscan tender types.

WEB ORDER PROCESSING
The Web Orders window is opened from the main menu: Sales/Invoices /Web Orders.


There are three views which can be selected in the Filter radio button group:
Awating stock - if the order is waiting for stock it will be displayed here.
Require payment - if a credit card payment is yet to be processed the order is displayed in this view.
Ready to invoice - orders where the stock has been received and the payment processed can be invoiced in this view. Users of the warehouse module would probably want to use the picking and packing window rather than this view.

Awaiting stock
Orders waiting for stock it will be displayed in the "Awaiting stock (F4)" view. This option is for viewing only and has no processing function. As backorders and special orders are released, orders will move out of this view.

Processing payments
Orders waiting for a manual credit card payment is to be processed are displayed in the "Require payment (F5)" view.
(If payment has been taken on the web site via a credit card gateway or via PayPal, the order will be displayed in the "Ready to invoice" view).

MOTO Payments
If your EFTPOS provider suppprts MOTO payments (where you can type the credit card details into the EFTPOS machine), select the "Tendering window (F8)" option in the Payment Method box. When you click the Take Payment (F12) button the Tendering window will open and you can process the credit card in the usuual way.

Other payment methods
If you are procesing the card payment my other means, select the "EFTPOS payment (F7)" option. The default tender type is be displayed in the combo box just above this radio button. You can change the tender type here if you wish.
Click the Take Payment (F12) button to mark the payment  as taken.

To have the invoice be created as you take the payment, tick the Invoice when tendering (F9) checkbox. Otherwise the order will be move to the "Ready to Invoice" view.
For users of the warehousing module, the order, after taking payment, be displayed in the Picking window.

Invoicing
Orders waiting is to be invoiced are displayed in the "Ready to invoice (F6)" view. To invoice orders, simply select them in the left browser and click the Invoice (F12) button.







.topic 1330
Web orders are picked up from your web site by Bookscan's e-Comms program. e-Comms stores the orders in the Bookscan database and Bookscan displays them in the Web Orders window. From the Web Orders window you can manage your web orders, processing them without re-keying, via the Order Entry window. For the distributor/publisher configuration, a picking slip will be created. For the retail configuration, it will be an invoice.

The Web Orders window is opened from the main menu: Sales/Invoices /Web Orders.



·	The upper browser displays all the outstanding web order header details – the customer's email address, the web order number and date, the order value and shipping method.
·	The lower browser shows the items ordered.
·	To view the customer details, select a line in the upper browser and click the Show Details (F7) button (or just double click on the line). The customer details will display, hiding the upper browser. Click the Show List (F7) button to go back to the previous view.



·	If the customer already in the customer master the Customer field will display the customer code and name. If it is empty you will need to add the customer. To add the customer to the customer master, just click on the Add button.
·	To invoice the order, click on the Invoice (F8) button. The Order Entry window will open with this order filled out.



Make any amendments that you wish to the order header information and then click on the Save (F12) button. The browser, with the order lines filled in, will now be displayed.



Make any amendments that you wish to the order lines and then click on the Finalise (F12) button and the Order Entry Footer window will open.



·	Add any other information such as comments, freight, invoice terms etc.
·	Click on the Payment (F9) button to open the Tendering window.
·	Process the payment as for a standard invoice. If there are back orders, you will have the choice of taking payment for the full sale or just for the items in stock. In the latter instance you will need to process another payment when invoicing the backorder. In the retail configuration, the backorder will take the form of a special order. Any payment for it will be stored as a deposit on the special order.
·	Click on the Post (F12) button to create the invoice (or for the distributor/publisher configuration, a picking slip).


.topic 2660
Customers can place orders with you electronically using the Pacstream service. See the EDI chapter for details about setting up Pacstream. Using EDI orders will save re-keying and reduce the number of order entry errors, saving you time and money.
Customer EDI purchase orders are received from Pacstream using Bookscan's e-Comms program. e-Comms stores the orders in the Bookscan database tables and Bookscan displays them in the Incoming EDI Purchase Orders window. From this window you can manage your orders, processing them without re-keying, via the Order Entry window.

PREPARING EDI ORDERS



·	The upper browser displays all the outstanding EDI order header details – the customer code, unique EDI number, and their order number and date. Other columns relate only to Coles Myer orders.
·	The lower browser shows the items ordered.
·	To view the order header details, select a line in the upper browser and click the Show Details (F7) button (or just double click on a line in either browser). The customer details will display, hiding the upper browser. Click the Resume (F7) button to go back to the previous view.



·	By default the selling price to be used in the invoice is that shown in the Order Price column and the New Price showing as zero will be ignored. If you enter a non-zero figure into the New Price field, that price will be used in the invoice.
·	Order lines where the order price is different to the order price are colored red.
·	You can change all the prices in at order using the radio buttons in the Pricing Calculations group. Select the calculation type and click the 'Apply to all items' button. The new price will be displayed in the browser.
·	You can edit an individual order line by double clicking it in the lower browser to load it to the edit line. Enter your changes and click the Save Line (F12) button.
·	To cancel an unprocessed order click on the Cancel PO (F9) button.

INVOICING EDI ORDERS
For the distributor/publisher configuration, a picking slip will be created. For the retail configuration, it will be an invoice.

To invoice the order, click on the Invoice PO (F8) button. The Order Entry window will open with this order filled out.



Make any amendments that you wish to the order header information and then click on the Save (F12) button. The browser, with the order lines filled in, will now be displayed.



Make any amendments that you wish to the order lines and then click on the Finalise (F12) button and the Order Entry Footer window will open.



·	Add any other information such as comments, freight, invoice terms, payments etc.
·	Click on the Post (F12) button to create the invoice (or for the distributor/publisher configuration, a picking slip).


.topic 1340
Invoice, EDI and picking slip enquiries

In the Invoice Enquiry window you can look up:
·	invoices,
·	credit notes,
·	EDI orders,
·	outstanding picking slips (distributor/publisher configuration) and
·	customer backorders (distributor/publisher configuration).

Open the window from the main menu: Sales/Invoices/Enquiry.



Selecting the enquiry type
The default enquiry type is invoice and credit note. To change the enquiry type, click on the appropriate button – EDI Orders (F7), Pick Slips (F8) and Backorders (F9).
Notes
·	Picking slips and backorders are only relevant for distributor/publisher configurations.
·	Back orders and EDI Orders are only available during customer searches. Select the customer first, and then click on the EDI Orders (F7) or Backorders (F9) button
·	Credit notes display with negative figure in the Qty column of the browser and a red text field saying "credit". See the diagram below.



You can display transactions by transaction number or by customer code.
Displaying a single transaction
(See the top diagram)
To display at transaction in the browser, select it from the Trans No combo box. The easiest and fastest way to do that is type in the transaction number and press the Enter key. Alternatively use the mouse to select it from the drop down list.

Displaying a customer's transactions.
Select a customer in the Customer field in the usual way: entering the customer code or pressing the F2 button to open the customer search window.



In customer mode, you can opt to display the customer's outstanding EDI orders, picking slips and backorders by clicking the corresponding button.

Searching for a transaction by customer order number
Click on the Order No (F11) button to open the Order No Search pop up window. Enter the order number onto the search field and press the OK button. The program will search the invoice and picking slip database tables and if it finds the transaction, display it in the browser.

Options

Changing the backorder quantity (wholesale module only)
·	Select the customer in the Customer field.
·	Click on the Backorders (F9) button.
·	Double click on the line you want to change.
·	A dialogue window will open displaying the existing backorder quantity.
·	Overtype the new quantity and click OK the button.

Deleting backorders
·	In backorder view,highlight the lines you want to delete.
·	Click on the Delete Item (F5) button.

Deleting a picking slip
Single transaction  view
·	Set the transaction type to picking slip by clicking on the Pick Slips (F8) button.
·	Select a picking slip from the Trans No combo box.
·	Click on the Delete Order (F4) button.

Customer view
·	Select the customer in the Customer field.
·	Highlight a line from the order you want to delete.
·	Click on the Delete Order (F4) button.
·	Note that you can only delete one picking slip at a time.

Deleting lines from a picking slip
·	In picking slip view,highlight the lines you want to delete.
·	Click on the Delete Item (F5) button.

Amending picking slips
·	You can make the following amendments to picking slips:
o	forward order date,
o	header discount,
o	freight.
·	Type your changes in the appropriate fields and then click on the Save (F12) button.


Quotation and pro forma invoice enquiries
Pro forms invoices and customer quotations are created in the Order Entry window. They can be viewed in the Pro form/Quotation Enquiry window. Open the enquiry window from the main menu: Sales/Invoices/Quotes/pro formas.



In the browser, pro forma invoices show a tick in the "Pro F" column.

You can display transactions by transaction number or by customer code.
Displaying a single transaction
To display at transaction in the browser, select it from the Trans No combo box. The easiest and fastest way to do that is type in the transaction number and press the Enter key. Alternatively use the mouse to select it from the drop down list.

Displaying a customer's transactions.
Select a customer in the Customer field in the usual way: entering the customer code or pressing the F2 button to open the customer search window.

Searching for a transaction by customer order number
Click on the Order No (F11) button to open the Order No Search pop up window. Enter the order number onto the search field and press the OK button. The program will search the quotation and pro forma invoice database table and if it finds the transaction, displays it in the browser.

Options

Deleting a transaction
Single transaction  view
·	Set the transaction type to picking slip by clicking on the Pick Slips (F8) button.
·	Select a picking slip from the Trans No combo box.
·	Click on the Delete Order (F4) button.

Customer view
·	Select the customer in the Customer field.
·	Highlight a line from the order you want to delete.
·	Click on the Delete Order (F4) button.
·	Note that you can only delete one picking slip at a time.

Deleting lines from a transaction
·	Highlight the lines you want to delete.
·	Click on the Delete Item (F5) button.


.topic 1350

From the main menu, click on Sales, then point to Invoices and then click on Reprint.



To print a range of invoice:
Type the first and last invoice numbers in the range into the respective boxes. Click OK.

To print a single invoice:
Leave the First invoice box at zero and type the invoice number you want in the Last invoice box. Click OK.

You can select which invoice form you use by clicking on the browse icon & selecting a different form from the list.  This is a per PC setting, so you can print different invoice layouts on different PCs, or set all to the same form.

.topic 1360

Quotes & Pro forma invoices are created in the  Invoice Entry window in the same was as an invoice.
Click on the link below to the details:
·	Invoice Entry

Enquiry on Quote / Pro forma
To enquire on a Quote / Pro Forma Invoice, follow the same steps as enquiring on a normal invoice but through the main menu, clicking Sales then selecting Invoicing, then clicking on Quotes/Pro Forma. See this link to view the steps on using this window, as per with standard invoices.


.topic 1370

Quotations and ( and pro forma invoices) are created in the Invoice Entry window.
Click on the link below to the details:
·	Order Entry

Enquiry on Quotes
To enquire on a Quote Invoice follow the same steps as enquiring on a normal invoice but through the main menu, clicking Sales then selecting Invoicing, then clicking on Quotes/Pro Forma. To view the steps on using this window, as per with standard invoices, click link.



.topic 1380

Approvals are created in the Order Entry window.
Refer the Order Entry chapter for details.




.topic 1390

You can mange and enquire on approvals in the Approval Enquiry window. Open this window from the main menu: Sales/Approval/Enquiry, returns, sales.

Displaying approvals
You can lookup Approvals in three ways:

Enquiry by Approval number
In the Approval No field, type in the approval number and press the Enter key or click on the down arrow and select from the drop down list. All the lines on the approval will be displayed in the browser.
	
Enquiry by customer
Select a customer in the Customer field in the usual way - i.e. enter the customer code, use the F3 button to open the customer search window or the Alt F3 button to recall the last customer. All approval lines for the customer will be displayed in the browser.

Enquiry by ISBN
Type the ISBN into ISBN field. Alternatively use one the title shortcuts, click the F2 button to open the product search window or use the Alt F3 button to recall the last ISBN you used in the program. All the approvals for that ISBN will be displayed in the browser.



The browser will display three quantity fields:
Qty		The quantity ordered.
Ret'd		The number of this item returned by the customer.
Inv'd		The quantity of this approval line that has been invoiced.

Actions
Deleting an approval
In the browser, highlight a line of the order you wish to delete and click on the Delete Order (F4) button.

Deleting a line from an approval
Highlight a line in the browser, click on the Delete Line (F5) button.

Approval returns
Click on the Returns (F6) button. The window will change to an orange colour and the browser will display only items which can be returned. See approval returns below for details.

Invoice an approval
Where stock is still outstanding against an approval you can invoice it by clicking on the Invoice Appro (F8) button. The browser will display in invoicing mode and the window will turn green. See invoicing approvals below for details.

Loading a loan file from an external scanner
This is a specialist function and can be ignored by most users
This option is for users using the approval module for handling items on loan and using hand held scanners to process the loans and returns. A brief summary follows but you should contact Barcode Solutions for further details on setting up and using this option.
Creating export files for the scanners
Open the context menu and select in turn, 'Create title export file' and then 'Create customer export file'. This will create csv files of your customers and products to load into your scanners.
Importing loan files from your scanners
Export your csv loan file from your scanner. Click on the Load File button in the Approval Enquiry window. A pop up window will display where you can select your csv file. Click the OK button to load the file into the approvals table.

Printing
To view the approval reports printing options, click on the Printer Icon on the Bookscan toolbar. A pop up box will be displayed showing the available approval reports. These are:
All approvals
Prints a report of all outstanding approvals.
Option: Include approvals that have been filled.

Approvals summary
Prints a summary of outstanding approvals.
Options: Sort by customer or by date.

Approvals over 14 days old
Prints a summary of approvals over 14 days old.
Options: Change aging date.
Include approvals that have been filled

Approval by customer
Prints a summary report of approvals for selected customers.
Options: Print in title order
Include approvals that have been filled.

Approval reprint
Reprints a single approval.
You will need to select the approval from the drop down list.

Approval returns

Approval returns are done in the Approvals Enquiry/Returns window. A step by step guide follows:

Step 1:	Enter "returns mode"
·	To process returns, click on the Returns (F6) button ( or press the F6 key).
·	The window will change to an orange colour to indicate that it is in "returns mode".
·	If you have already selected an approval number or a customer, then only items eligible for return will be displayed in the browser.

Step 2:	Select the customer or approval number
By Approval Number
Select the Approval No. from the drop down box. All items on that approval that are eligible to be returned will be displayed in the browser.

By Customer
Select the customer by entering their key in the Customer field or by using the F3 button. All approval items for that customer that are eligible to be returned will be displayed in the browser. This option is particularly useful if the customer has taken many items at different times and returns them all in one go.



Browser Column heading definitions
Qty		Quantity originally despatched
Outstand	Number eligible to be returned (i.e. not invoiced or already returned)
Ret Qty	Quantity of returns of that you have entered in this session.


Step 3:	Enter the items to be returned
There are two methods for processing the returns
Scanning
If you have the returned items in front of you, you can scan them in.
·	In the Barcode field, scan or type in the barcode.
·	A dialogue box will open asking for the Returns Quantity (defaulting to the quantity that is eligible to be returned).
·	Change the quantity if you wish and click on the OK button (or press the Enter key).
·	Repeat this step for each line to be returned.
Note: Items entered this way are processed against the oldest approval number first.

Double clicking
If multiple items have been sent to a customer on different approval numbers, you may wish to use the double clicking method to ensure that returns are allocated against the correct approval number.
·	Double click on a line in the browser.
·	A dialogue box will open asking for the Returns Quantity (defaulting to the quantity that is eligible to be returned).
·	Change the quantity if you wish and click on the OK button (or press the Enter key).
·	Repeat this step for each line to be returned.

Step 4:	Options	
·	To print a receipt for these returns, check the 'Print returns list' box.
·	To check for special orders, check the Check special orders box. This will cause a Special Orders Slip to print if anyone is waiting for this item.
·	To print a returns docket n the docket printer, tick the Print Docket checkbox.

Step 5: Process returns
·	Once all the returns have been entered for the selected customer or approval number, you can finalise the returns by clicking on the Process Returns (F6) button.
·	If you change your mind, click on the Cancel Returns button (or press the Escape key) to cancel the returns process.

Step 6:	End returns mode
·	To go back to enquiries, on the Cancel Returns button (or press the Escape key).


Invoicing approvals

You can invoice your customers for products sent to them on approval in two different areas of Bookscan:
Order Entry window
In the Order entry window, select the 'Standard Invoice' transaction type. Then after saving the header information, click on the append button to load the approval (or part of it) into the browser. Finalise the transaction. An invoice will be created and the approval table amended to show the approval as invoiced

Approval Enquiry window
You can invoice approvals in the Approval Enquiry window. Open this window from the main menu: Sales/Approval/Enquiry, returns, sales.

Step 1: Set to invoice mode
After selecting an approval or customer, click on the Invoice Appro (F8) button.
·	The browser will display in approval invoicing mode and the window will turn green. Note that only approval lines that have stock still outstanding will be displayed.
·	If you see a blank browser then either the approval has been invoiced or returned.



Step 2: Load the edit line
Double click on a line in the browser that you want to invoice.
·	The edit line will appear showing the ISBN, quantity to be invoiced and the pricing.
·	The quantity to be invoiced will default to the quantity outstanding except when you are editing a line, when it will show the quantity you entered previously.



Step 3: Editing
·	Amend the quantity, pricing and discount fields as required.
·	Click on the Save Line (F12) button to save the line.
·	Alternatively click the Clear Edit Line button (or press the Escape key) to close the edit line without saving.
·	In the browser the quantity to be invoiced will display in the Sales column.
·	Repeat steps 2 and 3 for each line you wish to invoice.

Handy hint
Auto Scroll (F11)
Tick this checkbox to have the edit line display the next line when you click the Save Line (F12) button. Using this option can speed up data entry.

Step 4: Create invoice
To create the invoice, click on the Post Invoice (F8) button. Alternatively click on the Cancel Invoicing button (or press the Escape key) to cancel the process and return to enquiry mode.
The effects of posting are:
·	An invoice will be created.
·	Both the stock on hand and approval quantities in the title master will be reduced for each line.
·	The quantity invoiced in the approvals database will be increased for each line.



.topic 1400

To reprint an approval:

Step 1:
From the main menu, click on Sales, then point to Approvals and then Print. Click on Reprint.

Step 2:	
Click on the down arrow    and  scroll down and select the approval number  from the list.

Step 3:
Click OK to reprint.


Other reports:

All	
Prints a report of all outstanding approvals.
Option: Include approvals that have been filled.

Summary
Prints a summary of outstanding approvals.
Options: Sort by customer or by date.

14 Days
Prints a summary of approvals over 14 days old.
Options: Change aging date.
	Include approvals that have been filled.

Customer	
Prints a summary report of approvals for selected customers.
Hold the control button down and click on the customers in the list that you wish to include in the report.

.topic 1410

You can remove completed approvals from the system older than a specified date:

Step 1:	
From the main menu, click on Sales, then point to Approvals and then click on Enquire.

Step 2:
Select the "purge from" date.
Click OK.


.topic 1440

Ordering
To create a purchase order for consignment stock, click on the  consignment  check box (or press F4) for each consignment line.
The purchase order for consignment lines will show This order line for consignment stock.



Receiving
When receiving stock, those lines that were ordered as consignments will have the Consignment box checked when you scan them in. You can turn any line into consignment stock by just clicking on the check box . Otherwise consignment receipts are processed in the same way as ordinary receipts.
When consignment receipts are posted, the On Hand and the Consignment figures in the title master are increased.

Sales
Bookscan automatically keeps  track of your consignment sales. If stock of a product is a mix of consignment and purchased stock, the system always assumes that you sell your purchased stock first. When that is all sold, sales are recorded as consignment sales.

Reconciliation
Periodically (usually monthly), you will need to advise your suppliers of your consignment sales. You do this in the Consignment Reconciliation window.
From the main menu select Sales / Consignments In to open this window.



Step 1 Update sales
In the Update to field select the date up to which you wish to process.   Then click on the Update sales button.
The system will search the sales history  and update the consignment sales quantity (Sales)  and average sales amount (Sales $) columns for each product in the browser. In the above example, there were 39 sales of "Rainmaker" at an average price of $17.64. The cost price, recorded during receiving, was $8.82. The Extended cost price was $343.98.

Step 2 Make amendments, shrinkage, correct returns, buy the stock
Double clicking on a line in the browser will copy it into the edit line. Here you can:
·	Amend the cost price if required.
·	If the cost price is to be calculated as a percentage of the average sell price, type that percentage into the Discount field and press the Tab key and the cost price will be recalculated.
·	If you are have decided to pay for the stock before selling it, enter the quantity to be sold in the Buy field.
·	If there has been any stock shrinkage and you are now going to pay for these items, enter the quantity in the Shrinkage field.
·	If you have returned the stock to the supplier, but have not processed them as consignment returns, enter the quantity returned in the Returned field. This will reduce the quantity on consignment but leave the on hand figure untouched.
Note: This procedure is only used to make corrections where stock was returned as non-consignment stock. If you want to process consignment returns, do so in the Draft returns window (main menu - Purchasing / Returns / Add / change )
·	Click on Save line (F12) to save the changes.

Step 3 Select invoice or sales advice option
In the Print area, select either Sales Advice to produce a Consignment Sales Advice report  or Invoice to create an invoice and update your creditors files.

Step 4 Process
Clicking the Process button produces your Consignment Invoice / Sales Advice reports. It will also update the consignment browser and the consignment field title master.

Right Mouse Options
Right click on the Consignment Reconciliation window to display these menu options:

Title master
Display the title master for the current product selected in the browser.

Delete consignment
Delete the currently selected consignment line.

Mark as complete
For the currently selected consignment line, sets the outstanding quantity as returned.

Show processing history
Opens a window showing a summary the consignment sale advices for the currently selected consignment line.
You can select a consignment advice here and reprint it.

Reprint consignment advice
Opens a window where you can select a consignment advice and reprint it.

Print summary
Prints a hard copy of the current browser. If the display is filtered by supplier, it will print a consignment listing for just that supplier. If no filter is set, the report lists consignments for all suppliers.

.topic 1450
Consignment inwards and outwards is a separately licensed module within Bookscan. Contact Barcode Solutions to purchase a license.
The consignment outwards module is very similar to the approvals module. The main difference is in the way you invoice a consignment.

Creating consignments out
Consignments out are creating in the Order Entry window. Refer the Order Entry chapter for details.

Managing consignments out and consignments out enquiries
You can mange and enquire on consignments out in the Consignments Out Enquiry window. Open this window from the main menu: Sales/ Consignments/ Consignments Out.

Displaying consignments out
You can lookup consignments out in three ways:

Enquiry by consignment number
In the Consignment No field, type in the consignment number and press the Enter key or click on the down arrow and select from the drop down list. All the lines on the consignment will be displayed in the browser.
	
Enquiry by customer
Select a customer in the Customer field in the usual way - i.e. enter the customer code, use the F3 button to open the customer search window or the Alt F3 button to recall the last customer. All consignment lines for the customer will be displayed in the browser.

Enquiry by ISBN
Type the ISBN into ISBN field. Alternatively use one the title shortcuts, click the F2 button to open the product search window or use the Alt F3 button to recall the last ISBN you used in the program. All the consignments out for that ISBN will be displayed in the browser.



The browser will display three quantity fields:
Qty		The quantity ordered.
Ret'd		The number of this item returned by the customer.
Inv'd		The quantity of this consignment line that has been invoiced.

Actions
Deleting a consignment
In the browser, highlight a line of the order you wish to delete and click on the Delete Order (F4) button.

Deleting a line from a consignment
Highlight a line in the browser, click on the Delete Line (F5) button.

Consignment returns
Click on the Returns (F6) button. The window will change to an orange colour and the browser will display only items which can be returned. See consignment returns below for details.

Invoice a consignment
As sales are reported on your customer's consignment stock, you can invoice them by clicking on the Invoice Sales (F8) button. The browser will display in invoicing mode and the window will turn green. See invoicing consignments below for details.

Printing
To view the consignment reports printing options, click on the Printer Icon on the Bookscan toolbar. A pop up box will be displayed showing the available consignment reports. These are:
All consignments out
Prints a report of all outstanding consignments.
Option: Include consignments that have been filled.

Consignments  summary
Prints a summary of outstanding consignments.
Options: Sort by customer or by date.

Consignments  over 14 days old
Prints a summary of consignments over 14 days old.
Options: Change aging date.
Include consignments that have been filled

Consignments by customer
Prints a summary report of consignments for selected customers.
Options: Print in title order
Include consignments that have been filled.

Consignment note reprint
Reprints a single consignment note.
You will need to select the consignment note number from the drop down list.

Consignment returns
Approval returns are done in the Consignments out Enquiry/Returns window. A step by step guide follows:

Step 1:	Enter "returns mode"
·	To process returns, click on the Returns (F6) button (or press the F6 key).
·	The window will change to an orange colour to indicate that it is in "returns mode".
·	If you have already selected a consignment number or a customer, then only items eligible for return will be displayed in the browser.

Step 2:	Select the customer or consignment number
By consignment note number
Select the consignment note number from the drop down box. All items on that consignment that are eligible to be returned will be displayed in the browser.

By customer
Select the customer by entering their key in the Customer field or by using the F3 button. All consigned items for that customer that are eligible to be returned will be displayed in the browser. This option is particularly useful if the customer has taken many items at different times and returns them all in one go.



Browser Column heading definitions
Qty		Quantity originally despatched
Outstand	Number eligible to be returned (i.e. not invoiced or already returned)
Ret Qty	Quantity of returns of that you have entered in this session.


Step 3:	Enter the items to be returned
There are two methods for processing the returns
Scanning
If you have the returned items in front of you, you can scan them in.
·	In the Barcode field, scan or type in the barcode.
·	A dialogue box will open asking for the Returns Quantity (defaulting to the quantity that is eligible to be returned).
·	Change the quantity if you wish and click on the OK button (or press the Enter key).
·	Repeat this step for each line to be returned.
Note: Items entered this way are processed against the oldest consignment number first.

Double clicking
If multiple items have been sent to a customer on different consignment numbers, you may wish to use the double clicking method to ensure that returns are allocated against the correct consignment number.
·	Double click on a line in the browser.
·	A dialogue box will open asking for the Returns Quantity (defaulting to the quantity that is eligible to be returned).
·	Change the quantity if you wish and click on the OK button (or press the Enter key).
·	Repeat this step for each line to be returned.

Step 4:	Options	
·	To print a receipt for these returns, check the 'Print returns list' box.
·	To check for special orders, check the Check special orders box. This will cause a Special Orders Slip to print if anyone is waiting for this item.
·	To print a returns docket n the docket printer, tick the Print Docket checkbox.

Step 5: Process returns
·	Once all the returns have been entered for the selected customer or consignment number, you can finalise the returns by clicking on the Process Returns (F6) button.
·	If you change your mind, click on the Cancel Returns button (or press the Escape key) to cancel the returns process.

Step 6:	End returns mode
·	To go back to enquiries, on the Cancel Returns button (or press the Escape key).


Invoicing consignments out
You can invoice consignments out in the Approval Enquiry window. Open this window from the main menu: Sales/ Consignments/ Consignments Out.

Step 1: Set to invoice mode
After selecting a consignment or customer, click on the Invoice Sales (F8) button.
·	The browser will display in consignment invoicing mode and the window will turn green. Note that only consignment lines that have stock still outstanding will be displayed.
·	If you see a blank browser, then either the consignment has been invoiced or returned in full.

Step 2: Select input method

Handy hint
Auto Scroll (F11)
Tick this checkbox to have the edit line display the next line when you click the Save Line (F12) button. Using this option can speed up data entry.

The program provides two methods for entering your customer's sales data:
Sales quantity method
Use this method if your customer has reported his actual sales quantities.
·	Click on the Sales radio button to set this mode of processing.
·	Double click on a line in the browser that you want to invoice.
·	The edit line will appear showing the ISBN, sales quantity field and the pricing.



·	The sales quantity will default to zero except when you are editing a line, when it will show the quantity you entered previously.
·	Type in the sales quantity.
·	Amend the pricing and discount fields as required.
·	Click on the Save Line (F12) button to save the line.
·	Alternatively click the Clear Edit Line button (or press the Escape key) to close the edit line without saving.
·	In the browser the quantity to be invoiced will display in the Sales column.
·	Repeat steps 2 and 3 for each line you wish to invoice.

Stock count method
Use this method if your customer has reported the amount of stock he has left.
·	Double click on a line in the browser that you want to invoice.
·	The edit line will appear showing the ISBN, stock count field and the pricing.



·	The stock count field will default to the quantity outstanding except when you are editing a line, when it will show the quantity you entered previously.
·	Type in the stock count.
·	Amend the pricing and discount fields as required.
·	Click on the Save Line (F12) button to save the line.
·	Alternatively click the Clear Edit Line button (or press the Escape key) to close the edit line without saving.
·	In the browser the stock count will display in the stock count column and the (calculated) sales quantity will display in the Sales column.
·	Repeat steps 2 and 3 for each line you wish to invoice.

Step 3: Create invoice
To create the invoice, click on the Post Invoice (F8) button. Alternatively click on the Cancel Invoicing button (or press the Escape key) to cancel the process and return to enquiry mode.
The effects of posting are:
·	An invoice will be created.
·	Both the stock on hand and consignment quantities in the title master will be reduced for each line.
·	The quantity invoiced in the consignments out database will be increased for each line.



.topic 1334
  Important: 	Close all windows within Bookscan
			on all terminals before proceeding.

Each day you need to close sales for the day to prepare your banking. If you do your banking more than once a day, you will need to run this process each time.

End of day overview
The end of day process is controlled in the Sales / Daily window and consists of several steps:

Printing the X report
As sales are made during the day the transactions are saved to a file called sales.dbf. The X report or the daily sales Graphic report will get its data from this file.

Closing sales
Closing sales copies all the data from the sales file into a file called psales.dbf and empties the sales.dbf file, ready for the next day's transactions.
Important: to ensure all the day's transactions are completed, all terminals must be set back to the main menu before closing sales. Normal business can resume immediately after the closing is complete – this should be a very short time.

Printing the daily sales and banking reports
The All sales (sales by item) and Cashbook reports use the psales.dbf file for their data.

Posting sales
Posting sales copies the data in the psales.dbf file into the sales history files, specifically saleline.dbf (financial data) and salehist.dbf (item sales). It also updates various summary files including period (usually weekly), monthly and annual sales files. Once these updates are done psales.dbf is emptied.

CLOSING AND POSTING SALES
Open the Daily Sales window from the main menu: click on Sales/Daily.
This window will guide you through the end of day process, remembering where you are up to in the process and ensure that you complete all the compulsory steps.
As you complete each step, the system will display a tick in the checkbox shown against each process.

Step by step guide to end of day processing



Step 1:	Print X reports
·	An X report is a summary of the day's takings by transaction type for all registers. The report gets its data from the daily sales table - sales.dbf.
·	You can choose to print the report in summary format or in detail; use the Summary Format check box below the X Report button to set this flag.
·	On the Sales tab of System Options, there are two more options you can set up:
·	Split register takings: setting this flag will report the sales takings for each register.
·	Split store takings: if your store is divided into sections, say General and Children's, you can set the register names in each area to reflect this by adding a prefix, e.g. GReg1, Greg2 and CReg3.  With the split store takings flag set, the takings will be subtotaled for each area.
·	At the bottom left of the Daily Sales window there is a checkbox to print this report on the docket printer. Otherwise the report prints to your standard printer.

You can also run a graphic sales report here.

Step 2:	Close sales
·	You will need exclusive access to the sales file to run this short routine. So ensure that all terminals have no Bookscan windows open.
·	Click on the Close sales button.
·	As soon as sales are closed you may begin trading again.
·	The date of the last close is shown below the button.

Step 3:	Print sales and cash reports
Note that these reports can only be printed after closing sales and before posting!
Click on the appropriate buttons to print the All Sales and Cash Book reports.
All sales report
This report is a list of all the day's sales by item. The data is taken from the psales.dbf table.
You can order the report by either:
·	Supplier
·	Sales Department
Other options are:
·	Summary or details format
·	Total on ISBN: when this flag is set the report will show total sales for each product. When not set, each sale it listed.
·	Consignment sales: when set, the report will also include consignment sales.
·	Consolidation (department order only): this special set up is where you have prefixed your department codes by a single letter to split them into groups. In this case, the report is sorted by these groups. E.g. you have departments A100,A101, A102, B100, B101 etc. The report will show all 'A' departments first then 'B's etc, subtotaling on each grouping.
	
Cash book report
This report is a list of all the day's sales transactions by transaction type. The data is taken from the psales.dbf table.
Options here are:
·	Summary or details format
·	A Banking List: with this flag set, the report will also print a banking list showing the cheques taken that day.
·	Split stores: splits the report up in register groups, similar to the X report (see above).
·	Split register takings: setting this flag will report the sales takings for each register.

Step 4:	Post sales
After reconciling your takings, click on the Post Sales button to conclude the process. The psales.dbf file will be copied into the sales history files and used to update the various summary files including the period, monthly and annual sales files. Once these updates are done psales.dbf is emptied.



.topic 1460
Vouchers

Vouchers are set up in the Title Master with the Type set to Untracked Voucher, Voucher, Tracked, or Docket Voucher.
For Docket vouchers, the starting number is initially set in the System Options - Counters tab.  Tracked Vouchers use the number that is on your pre-printed voucher, and this is enterred into Bookscan during the sale process.


Tracked vouchers
A tracked voucher is a gift voucher whose number and outstanding value is recorded within the Bookscan program. You can view the amount outstanding and the history of the vouchers use in the Voucher Enquiry window.

You need to set up voucher tender types in the Transaction types.

In the Tendering window, when you select a tender transaction of type 'tracked voucher', the window replace the Amount Tendered field with two fields: Voucher Amount and Voucher Number.



Enter the voucher number in the second field. The Voucher Amount field will then display the amount outstanding on the voucher. Click the OK button or press the Enter key, and if the voucher is sufficient to cover the sale, the transaction will be finalised. If the voucher still has an outstanding amount after the sale, this amount will be displayed in a pop-up window. Write this new balance on the voucher.
If the voucher is insufficient to cover the sale total, click the OK button will cause the amount to be saved to the Transaction browser, the Owing and Amount Tendered fields reduced and the tender type reset to the default.



Select another tender type to complete the transaction. See 'multiple tender types' below.

Docket Vouchers

These are tendered using the same process as tracked vouchers above, however when only partially redeemed, Bookscan will print a new copy of the voucher with the same number, but an updated remaining value, when the sale is completed.

Rewards traked vouchers

You must have set up a rewards tracked voucher separate to the normal tracked vouchers.  When you select this tender type, the drop down list will display ony the reward tracked vouchers for the customer selected in the cash sales screen.



Selling tracked vouchers
Tracked voucher are set up in the title master in the usual way but with the 'product type' set as 'tracked voucher'. You may have your vouchers printed with a barcoded product number on them or you may choose to set up your vouchers with an easy to remember product code such as 'VOU'. See the Title Master section for further details. To sell your vouchers through the POS, enter the product code in the Barcode field. The program will display the Voucher Entry window.



Enter the number of vouchers the customer is buying.
In the next field enter the first voucher in the sequence. The program will then display the final number in the sequence. If any of the voucher numbers in the sequence have already been sold, you will be prompted.
If you have a broken sequence of numbers, break them up into contiguous sequences or enter each voucher individually.
Click the OK (F12) button to save the line to the browser.
Then add any other purchases and finalise the sale as usual.


Gift cards and untracked vouchers
You may find it useful to set gift cards and untracked voucher transactions to be of  type "require name". Where this setting is made, you will be required to enter a customer name (or other detail such as a voucher number) in a text field on the Tendering window. (Refer to the Set Up chapter for details in setting up the various transaction types).



So in the Tendering window, select your transaction type.  The window will display a text field Surname below the Amount Tendered field. You can overtype the amount tendered if required then press the Enter or the Tab key to move to the Surname field. You can type up to 20 characters. Click the OK button or press the Enter key to finalise the transaction. If the amount tendered is greater than the sale amount, the difference is displayed as change in the Change window. If the amount tendered is insufficient to cover the sale, it becomes a  part payment, and you will need to select another tender transaction to complete the sale - see 'multiple tender types' below.

Enquire on Vouchers
From the main menu, click on Sales, then point  to Vouchers and then click on Enquire.
A window will open displaying the list of vouchers on the system.
Check the Show outstanding only box to display only those vouchers not finalised.



Columns displayed:
Voucher number
Date issued
Customer Key (if any)
Customer name (if any)
Purchase price
Amount outstanding
If it is a voucher generated by a rewards program

Click on the      icon at the top of Bookscan to print a listing of the vouchers.

You can also double click in the Outstanding field to adjust the amount to a new, (lower only), value.  The amount cannot be adjusted upwards.

Print voucher reports
From the main menu, click on Sales, then point to Vouchers and click on Print.
You have the option to select all vouchers or finalised vouchers only.
Click OK to print.

Purge vouchers
From the main menu, click on Sales, then point to Vouchers and click on Purge.
The system will offer to purge all finalised vouchers older than a year. To change the purge date, select a new date from the drop down box.
You have the option to purge all vouchers or finalised vouchers only.
Click OK to purge.


.topic 1470

For information on using the accounts receivable module, click on the relevant links below:

Setting up
· Setting up your system to use the debtors module.

Customers
· Setting up customers as debtors.
· Taking a customer off stop.

Enquiries
· Looking up a customer's account.

Transactions
· Posting invoices, credit notes and payments to an account.
· Journal debits and credits.
· Applying unapplied payments and credits.

Reports
· Accounts receivable reports.

End of month processing.
· Adding interest.
· Snapshot.
· Statements.
· Aging.

Year End processing.
· Rolling over the accounts
· Purging


.topic 1500

Your system will already have been configured for you by Barcode Solutions during system installation.
The following information is for those making subsequent changes to their system.

Selecting the account type default
Below the debtors check box is the Open Item check box.
Here you can select the default account type that will be displayed when adding a customer to the customer master.

Select from the two types of debtors accounts supported by Bookscan. They are:
	· Open item accounting (Check the box to select)
	· Balance brought forward

Open item accounting
This retains all transactions on the account until they are paid. At the next aging, they are then moved to the history file. Payments are applied against specific Invoices.
Unpaid or part paid items remain on the account until cleared.

Balance brought forward
These accounts show only the account balance for anything older than current month transactions.
The complete history can be obtained only from previous statements.

Barcode Solutions strongly recommend the use of Open Item accounting as this retains the details of each transaction until cleared.
Should you be asked some months later to explain how an outstanding balance is made up, this is very simple with Open Item Accounting.  With BBF Accounting this information is not readily available.

Setting up debtors for multiple stores
This will have been configured by Barcode Solutions when they installed the system.
If all the debtors are to be handled at a head office, check the following boxes on the Stores window of System Options:
	· Centralised debtors
	· Installation has a head office
If this store is also the head office, check the box:
	· Installation is a head office
For branch stores leave this box unchecked.
Click on the link to go to System Options for details.

	   Return to accounts receivable summary


.topic 1480

Customer Enquiry
Step 1: Opening
From the main menu click on Debtors and then on Transactions.
The Debtor Transaction window will open.

Step 2: Selecting a customer
Select a customer in the Customer field either by entering the customer code or using back slash or other shortcuts.
Alternatively click on the Seek (F3) button to open the customer Find window.
To recall the last  customer, click Recall Last (Alt + F3) button.



Step 3: Transaction history
Click on the Show History (F9) button to view completed transactions.
Click on the  Show Transactions (F9) to return to viewing current transactions.

Note: Current Transactions window is green, as shown in the picture above, whereas the Debtors History is violet colour.

Step 4: Invoice enquiry
To view a transaction's details, double click on the transaction line.
This will display the Invoice Enquiry window. For information on Invoice Enquiry Window, click link.


Invoice Search
If you know the Invoice number, but not the customer it belongs to you can use the Invoice Search.
Click on the Invoice Search (F8) button.
Enter in the Invoice No. i.e. 23.
Then click OK button.

If the invoice number exists, then the customer whom it belongs to will be displayed and the invoice selected.

Context Menu

If you right click to bring up the context menu, there are useful functions shown.


1.	Invoice					Create an invoice record if one is missing.  See also Search missing invoices..
2.	Credit					Create a credit note record if one is missing.
3.	Payment					Make a Debtor payment.
4.	Debit Journal				Create a journal record to balance a excess credit.
5.	Credit Journal				Create a journal record to balance a excess debit or forgive a debt.
6.	Refund					Refund an over payment
7.	Credit allocation				This opens the credit allocation window to assign unallocated credits or payments to invoices.
Show Current / History 			As per [F9] button.
Recalculate Customer account totals	Recalculates the totals for the selected customer displayed in the top right of the window for Current / 30 / 60 / 90.
Recalculate totals for all customers	As above but for all customers.
Customer account utilities			Open the Account Utilities window.
Search missing invoices			Searched the invoice tables for customer invoices that do not have a matching debtor record.
Compare Invoice total and Debtor Amount Looks fot cases where the invoice total does not match the invoice value recorded in the debtors table.

	     Return to accounts receivable summary


For more information:
	 Invoice Enquiry

.topic 172

To open the Debtors'  End of Month window, go to the main menu and click on Debtors->End of Month.

This window will guide you through the  end of month process, remembering where you are up to in the process and  ensuring that you complete all the various steps.

As you complete each step, the system will display a tick in the checkbox shown against each process.



Step 1: Reset Window	(Compulsory step)
Click on the Reset Flags button to set the window from last month .

Step 2: Print Reports    	(Optional step)
Click on each of the four report buttons on turn to produce the:
	Trial Balance
	Journals report
	Payments report
	Sales report

Options
The Trial Balance has a Summary format option and allows you to option all include debtors with a zero balance.
The other three reports have an option for using only the Current period.
The option settings you choose will be saved for next time you use this window.

	
Step 3: Backup Data 	(Compulsory step)
·	Ensure that all other terminals have no Bookscan windows open.
·	Ensure that all other Bookscan windows on your own terminal are closed.
·	Click on the Backup Data button. This will open th backup window.
·	Select the drive you wish to backup to. and click the backup button.
·     All databases related to debtor's end of month will be backed up to a file called: EOMBackup.zip
·	Click on the Exit button when done.

Step 4: Calculate Interest (Optional step)
If you are charging interest on overdue accounts:
·	Enter the annual interest rate in the Annual Interest Rate field.
·	Click on the Interest button.

If you are not charging interest on overdue accounts:
·	Click on the Skip checkbox.
	
Step 5: Run Statements (Optional step for now)
This step can be run now, or you can run them later from the snapshot of the accounts that is automatically done as part of the aging process.
To defer the process, click on the Print statements using the snapshot radio button and go on to the next step.
You can also choose to send the statements via emil directly for those customers with email addresses.  Detailed instructions here for setting up customers & email.

Before starting the statement printing, select
	Statement Date (defaults to today's date)
	Due Date (defaults to 30 days from today's date.)

Options
To add a  message to the statements, click the  Include the following statement message check box and type in the message ( three lines of 42 characters each.)
 You can also select weather to print statements for debtors with current transactions but zero balances.
Another option to print to file. Click on the Print to file checkbox and then enter the path in the field below.

Reprinting
To reprint a single statement click on the Print statement only for the selected debtor radio button and then select the customer in field above this button.
To reprint all statements from a selected debtor , click on the second radio button in this group and select the customer in the field above these buttons.


Step 6: Aging	(Compulsory step)
Click on the Age Accounts button.
The window will display the customer names as it processes them, so that you can see how it is progressing.
If you have not printed statements, you can print them now from the snapshot.	


.topic 2860
Statements can be emailed to debtors during End Of Month.  Those who do not have an email will be saved into a single PDF that can be printed for mailing.

1. Before setting up in Bookscan, you need to have the PDFexport printer device installed on your computer.  To do this, download the installer from http://support.e-web-site.com/downloads/ftp/Barcode_PDF_Writer.zip
Open the zip file with File Explorer and extract the Barcode PDF Writer folder to your Bookscan Downloads folder.  Go into the folder & double click the Setup.exe to run the installer.

Follow the prompts & leave the default settings.  If asked, do not set it as your default printer.

2. Set up email program.

2a. Mozilla Thunderbird (as at v78.6.1): Go to Tools – Options, Scroll down & click Config Editor.
In the search bar enter mapi.blind-send.warn, double click on it to edit & set it to false.

2b. MS Outlook: You will probably need to apply some settings in the registry to allow Bookscan to send the emails.  You can download & set them by running the registry file from: http://support.e-web-site.com/downloads/utilities/Outlook_v12-16.reg

3. In the Customer Master, there are now options to apply a secondary email address for finance and the option for No email statements.  If a Finance email is saved on the address tab, it will be used in place of the regular email.



If the client does not wish to receive statements by email, you can tick the No email statements on the Details tab.



4. To set up to email statements, go through the End Of Month process as normal until you reach the Run Statements section.  Before running them, tick the I Would Like To Email Statements checkbox & click on the Email Settings button.



In the next window, enter the text you want to appear as the email header, & in the body.



Clicking on the Help For Email Setting button will open a window with the codes to have the emails customised for the clients with their names.



eg. If in the example above, I have used 'Dear &(salute) &(surname),'.  This will start the body of the email to, (for example Mr John Smith), as 'Dear Mr Smith,', based on the data entered in the salutation & surname fields of the client in the Customer Master.

Once this has been entered, click the Test button to verify that the PDF printer & email are set up & working.  Then click Save (F12).

You can now click Run Statements.  This will generate the emails & send them one by one through your email program as an attachment.  The emails will go to the clients from the local PC email account, with the normal footer for that account.

Statements that are not emailed will be saved as a PDF in the [database folder]\debeom folder, and can be printed for mailing in bulk if required.  After sending emails out, you can see them in your Sent folder, & you should check your Inbox for any rejections or bounce messages.  These will come with a reason for the rejection that can be used to correct the issue.

.topic 1490

· At the end of the financial year you should make and keep an  annual accounts backup.

· You also need to do an annual rollover. This will zero the accumulated year to date figures for each account.

· Before doing this, ensure you have printed all reports

· The Year End routine should be done at the same time as (either just before or after) the end of month. The monthly rollover is still necessary.

· Statements must have been printed before running the year end routine (because it changes the YTD figure).

· The Year End routine is run from the main menu::
	· From the main  menu click on Debtors Utilities/Year End.
	· Click on the Yes button.

· If you are short of disk space, you can purge old debtor transaction.
	· From the main  menu click on Debtors Utilities/Debtor Purge.
	· Select the cut- off date and then click on the Yes button.

	  Return to Summary


.topic 1510

For information on using the accounts receivable module, click on the relevant links below:

Setting up
· Setting up your system to use the creditors module.

Enquiries
· Looking up a supplier's account.

Payments
· Recording a payment.

Transactions
· Manually posting invoices and credit notes to an account.
· Journal debits and credits.

Reports
· Accounts payable reports.

End of month processing
· Printing Remittance advices.
· Aging.
· Purging

Year End processing
· Rolling over the accounts


.topic 1520

Step 1: Opening creditors
From the main menu, click on Creditors and then click on Transactions.



Step 2: Selecting a supplier
In the Creditors Transactions window, select a supplier by either:
·	typing the supplier key in the Supplier box.
·	clicking the    button and scrolling through drop down list, or
·	clicking the Seek (F3)  button and using the Find window.

On the right-hand side will be displayed the suppliers current, 30, 60, 90 and total purchases YTD.

Step 3: Transaction history
Click on Show History (F9) button to show completed transactions. This window is violet.
To return from history, click Show Current (F9). (The Current window is pink)

Step 4: Enquiry on invoice
To enquire on an invoice, double-click on line. This will display the Enquire On Creditor Invoice window (turtle green).
This window will display each line for the invoice, with the entire invoices details.
Close this window to return to Creditors Transactions.
Then either view a different invoice or return to step 2 and select a different supplier.

Context Menu

If you right click to bring up the context menu, there are useful functions shown.



1.	Invoice					Create an invoice record if one is missing.
2.	Credit					Create a credit record if one is missing.
3.	Payment					Make a Creditor payment record.
4.	Debit Journal				Create a journal record to balance a excess credit.
5.	Credit Journal				Create a journal record to balance a excess debit or forgive a debt.
6.	Credit allocation				This opens the credit allocation window to assign unallocated credits or payments to invoices.
Change invoice details			Allows you to adjust some of the details enterred when receiving the invoice, if required.
Supplier account utilities			Open the Account Utilities window.
Replace all due date			Replaces the Due Date of all invoices with the date you specify.

	    Return to accounts payable summary

.topic 1530

Posting invoices
If you have selected Auto Post GRNs in System Options, invoices are automatically posted to accounts payable during receiving.
If Auto Post GRNs is not selected all invoices and credit notes have to be entered manually as described below.

Manual Invoices
Note that if Auto post GRNs in system options has been selected, invoices are automatically posted here during receiving.
In that case the manual invoice entry allows you to enter an invoice raised externally.

Step 1:
From the main menu, click on Creditors and then click on Transactions.

Step 2:
In the Creditors Transactions window, select a supplier by either:
·	typing the supplier key in the Supplier box.
·	clicking the    button and scrolling through drop-down list, or
·	clicking the     button and using the Find window.

Step 3:
Right click anywhere in the window and select Invoice (or Credit) from the drop down menu.

Step 4:
Enter the customer's Reference number , the Transaction amount and a Description of the transaction.
Click OK.


Credit notes and journals.
Manual credit notes and journals are handled in exactly the same way as manual invoices except that,  instead of Invoice, you select Credit, Debit Journal or Credit Journal  from the drop-down menu.
· Journal Credits can be applied against any outstanding debit.
   If no debit is selected, these entries appear on the account as unapplied credits.
· Journal Debits can be applied against Credits, Journal Credits, or any unapplied payments.

	   Return to accounts payable summary

.topic 1540

Your system will already have been configured for you by Barcode Solutions during system installation.
The following information is for those making subsequent changes to their system.

Selecting the account type default
On the Modules tab in System Options (from the main menu - select Utilities/ System Options.)
Below the creditors check box is the Balance BF Credit check box.
Here you can select the default account type that will be displayed when adding a customer to in the customer master.

Select from the two types of accounts supported by Bookscan.
They are:
	· Open item accounting (Check the box to select)
	· Balance brought forward

Open item accounting retains all transactions on the account until they are paid. At the next ageing, they are then moved to the history file. Payments are applied against specific Invoices. Unpaid or part paid items remain on the account until cleared.

Balance brought forward accounts show only the account balance for anything older than the current month's transactions. The complete history can be obtained only from previous statements.

Barcode Solutions strongly recommend the use of Open Item accounting as this retains the details of each transaction until cleared.
Should you be asked some months later to explain how an outstanding balance is made up, this is very simple with Open Item Accounting.  With BBF Accounting this information is not readily available.

Auto posting GRNs
If you check this box, invoices and credit notes are automatically posted to the supplier account during receiving. (Of course you will still be able to add invoices and credit notes manually as well). This is the usual way of setting up creditors.
If you leave this box unchecked you will have to add all invoices and credit notes manually.

Setting up creditors for multiple stores
This will have been configured by Barcode Solutions when they installed the system.
If all the ordering and creditors are to be handled at a head office, check the following boxes on the Stores window of System Options:
	· Centralised orders
	· Installation has a head office
If this store is also the head office, check the box:
	· Installation is a head office
For branch stores leave this box unchecked.
Click on the link to go to System Options for details.

	   Return to accounts payable summary



.topic 1550

End of Month
At month end there are three processes to be done on creditors, after your cheque run:
	· Print the remittances.
	· Age the accounts
	· Purge old orders.

Remittance Advices
From the main menu, click on Creditors and then point to End of Month and then click on Remittances.
You can choose to print remittances for:
	· All Creditors
	· A single creditors (select a creditor in the drop down box).
	· All creditors starting from the one selected.
	· Queued creditors - Use this option if used the Creditors/Cheques/Individual option to record your payments to creditors. Remttance advices for all the creditors you selected will be printed.

When  printing remittance advices for all creditors, check the Print for creditors with current transactions but zero balances
All payments show as current if there is an invoice in the 30 day period and a payment in the current period which clears the account, these would be missed if you don't check this box.

Aging
Before aging the accounts, ensure all activity on the network has ceased.
Then do an accounts back up.
Then age the accounts:
From the main menu, click on Creditors and then point to End of Month and then click on Aging. Click the OK button and it's done.

Purging Old Records
From the main menu, click on Creditors and then point to End of Month and then click on Purge.
The default date is twelve months before the current date.
However, depending on the size of your accounts, choose whatever date suits you.


Year End
The only thing you have to do with creditors at year end is to zero the YTD purchases figures.
From the main menu, click on Creditors and then point to End of Month and then click on Year end.
Change the date if necessary, and then click OK.

	   Return to accounts payable summary Remittance

.topic 2500
Please note: MYOB export is a licensed functionality.  Contact Barcode Solutions to purchase a license.
If you do not have a license you can use, for evaluation purposes, the window up to the point where the MYOB files are updated.

Introduction: exporting Bookscan accounts to MYOB

You can export all transactions created in Bookscan to MYOB standard edition V17 onwards. It only takes about 10 minutes to set up Bookscan for MYOB export. The steps are outlines below. Once set up, you can export daily weekly, monthly or whenever you choose. Exporting should only take a few minutes.

During the export the following types of transactions are totaled and journals are created for import into MYOB:
·	POS sales
·	Laybys
·	Layby deposits, deposit refunds and payments
·	Special order deposits and refunds
·	Special order deposit redemptions
·	Debtor payments and refunds
·	Cost of goods sold
·	Invoices and credit notes (if you are not exporting them individually).
·	Purchases and credit claims (if you are not exporting them individually).

If you are not using the Bookscan creditors option, you can export your supplier invoices and credit claims individually rather than as totaled journals.  In this case you will also need to export your supplier cards into MYOB.
Similarly if you wish to handle debtor payments in MYOB rather than in Bookscan, you can export your customer invoices and credits individually rather than as totaled journals. In this case you will need to export your customer cards into MYOB.
You can set one or both of these options on the Financials tab of System Options.

Important note
For the export of purchases you will need to have the correct invoice totals and GST for supplier invoices. These can be entered in several places:
·	First page of the Receiving window
·	The final window when posting received items into stock.
·	The Good Inwards History window: this is a new window for version 5.00.00. To open it, select Purchasing/Incoming/Receiving history from the main menu. Double click on a line to edit the invoice details.
·	The Creditors window: Select "change invoice details" from the context menu.

Export methods
There are two methods of exporting into MYOB:

1. Exporting directly to MYOB
Exporting directly to MYOB is faster and safer than using manual files. The cost of this service is including in the Bookscan accounts export license - there is no extra charge.

2. Exporting via csv files
To set up this option just click on the Create CSV import file radio button and then select the path for the csv files in the file path field.

Five steps to set up exporting to MYOB:
Step 1: Set up the MYOB activation code.
	
Step 2: Set up the MYOB ODBC drivers.	
	
Step 3: Set up Bookscan.

Step 4: Map your chart of accounts.

Step 5: Prepare for first time use

These steps are detailed below in the Setting Up section.

Summary of procedures for exporting from Bookscan to MYOB:
·	Exporting out of Bookscan and into MYOB
·	Exporting purchases separately
·	Exporting invoices separately
Detailed instructions on exporting are set out below in the Exporting to MYOB section.

Procedures for exporting to MYOB
	Setting up MYOB Export
	Exporting out of Bookscan and into MYOB
	Exporting purchases separately
	Exporting invoices separately


.topic 2510
Step 1: Connecting Bookscan to MYOB
To connect Bookscan to MYOB you must first update your MYOB license. Please follow the steps below:
·	Call Barcode Solutions for a MYOB activation number.
·	Call 1300 555 151 and select the option "to connect an add-on solution to MYOB". You will be required to quote this Add-on Solution activation number and your MYOB serial number.
·	Open the company file and login using the MYOB Administrator ID and Password. In the case of a multi-user system, you should use the 'Single User' option.



·	Once logged in, from the 'Setup' menu select 'Company Information'.


·	Choose the 'License' button at the bottom left of the Company Information screen.



·	Follow the onscreen instructions to update the license information held within the company file.


Once these steps have been completed, the file will be activated for your Add-on Solution and Bookscan Bookscan will be able to integrate with your MYOB company data file.

Step 2: Installing MYOB ODBC
You will need to set up MYOB ODBC. This is quite simple to do:

Install the software
·	In Windows, click Start, then All programs.
·	From the menu, select MYOB Accounting Plus v??/MYOB Tools/MYOB ODBC/ Install MYOB ODBC Direct V?.
·	Follow the instructions in the installation program.

Setting up the ODBC drivers
·	In windows, click Control Panel.
·	In Control Panel, double click Administrative Tools. Then double click Data Sources (ODBC). The Data Source ODBC Administrator window will open.


·	Click the Add button. Select MYOB_ODBC_AU7 and click the Finish button. Note that the name of the ODBC driver will vary with your location and version number.

·	In the next window that opens, enter a unique data source name say, 'MYOB7' and a Description say, 'MYOB Bookscan'.
·	In the Company file path field browse to your MYOB program (e.g. 'C:\myob16\MyShop.myo' ).
·	Click the OK Button

Step 3: Setting up Bookscan
Open the Accounts Export window from the main menu: Accounts/Accounts export.

In the set up tab:

Exporting directly to MYOB
·	Click on the direct to MYOB radio button.
·	In the 'MYOB .myo path' field, select the path of your MYOB account.
Example: C:\MYOB17\MyShop.myo
·	In the 'MYOB .exe path' field, select the path of your MYOB program.
Example: C:\MYOB17\MYOB.exe
·	In the MYOB ODBC DSN field, enter the name (DSN) you have given your MYOB ODBC driver.
Example: MYOB7
·	In the Network protocol field, select the network type.
Example: No Network

Exporting via csv files
·	Click on the Create csv export file radio button.
·	In the File path field, select the folder where you want your csv files placed.
Example: C:\MYOB17\e-BilityExport




Step 4: Setting up the chart of accounts
You will need to map your Bookscan data to your chart of accounts in MYOB.
A default chart of accounts (CoA) is set up in Bookscan when you first open the MYOB Export window. The chart is based on the default CoA that is created by MYOB for a bookshop. You can edit the account numbers to match the account number you have set up in MYOB.

Open the MYOB Export window from the main menu: Accounts/Export to accounts.
The CoA is displayed on the Setup tab.

The browser at the top right displays two cash asset accounts:
	1-1110 Cheque account
	1-1130 Cash drawer
You can add extra asset accounts by clicking on the Add Asset Account button.

Other accounts are listed the browser at the lower right. These accounts have a one-to-one mapping to the various transaction types so, while you can change the account numbers and descriptions, you can't add new accounts here. You should edit the account numbers to match those you have set up in MYOB. Just double click on the number you to change and overtype them.

Notes:
·	For each transaction type you have set up in Bookscan (cash, cheques, EFTPOS, vouchers etc), there is a separate Income – sales account set up on the Bookscan CoA. If you are using the standard MYOB CoA set up, you will need to add these accounts to your MYOB COA. If you do not want to split the Income – sales accounts change all these account numbers to 4-1100 (or your Income – Sales own account number).
·	Even if you are not using an area of Bookscan such as laybys, just leave the CoA entry in the browser. The export will ignore it.
·	At any time you can re-load the default chart of accounts by pressing the Load Default COA button.

Example
In the diagram above, EFTPOS sales have a default income account of 4-1115. This account will need to be added to your MYOB CoA. It has a default corresponding cash account of 1-1130 which is for the cash drawer. This figure should be changed to 1-1110 which is the cheque account.

Step 5: Preparing for first time use
You will need to mark old records as not to be exported. To do this:
·	Click on the 'Prepare for first use' button.
·	Select the date and press the OK button.
Records dated prior to the date selected will be marked as exported.


.topic 2530

You can export your Bookscan data to MYOB daily weekly, monthly or whenever you choose. Exporting should only take a few minutes.

When exporting from Bookscan to MYOB, the program will total all your various transactions created since the last export and create journals for them in MYOB. Fir invoices and purchases, you can opt to export the transactions individually if you wish.

Exporting accounts
·	Exporting takes place in the Journals tab of the MYOB Export window.
·	Open the tab and you will see the top right group box 'Load from sales'. This displays the date of the oldest transaction ready to be exported ("Start Date") and the date of the latest transaction ready to be exported ("End Date"). You can change the dates of the export to what you require (say, to the last month's transactions).
·	Click on the Load button to load the transactions in to the browser. All transactions between the dates specified will be totaled and the journals to be created will be displayed in the browser.

·	Select the date you want for the journals (say, the last day of last month).
·	Press the Export Journals button and the export is complete.

Effects of the export:
·	Journals will be created in MYOB for each line in the Journals browser.
·	The MYOB chart of accounts will be updated.
·	The transactions in Bookscan will be flagged as exported.


Using the manual csv file method
·	The process is the same as for the direct export except that in the last step, pressing the Export Journals button will cause the program to create a single csv text file called JournalsYYYYMMDD.txt in the path you selected in the Set up tab. The file will comprise all the journals to be loaded into MYOB
·	Open MYOB. In the MYOB main menu, select File\Import date\General journal entries. This will open the Import File window.
·	In the "Import file format" combo box, select "Comma-separated".
·	In the "First record is" combo box, select "Data record".
·	Click the Continue button.
·	In the next window that opens, navigate to the file path you select earlier and select the JournalsYYYYMMDD.txt file. Then click the Open button.
·	In the Import Data window that now appears click on the Match All button. Then click the Import button and you are done. You may now wish to move the text file to a new folder, and re-name it, to prevent it being accidentally imported a second time.


.topic 2540
If you are not using the Bookscan creditors option, you can export your supplier invoices and credit claims individually rather than as totaled journals. You can set this option on the Financials tab of System Options. In System Options you can also select whether to export your credit claims as 'orders, or 'bills'. Check your MYOB documentation to see which suits your MYOB set up.

Supplier invoices, credit claims & suppliers
If you have selected "Export purchases individually" in System options, an extra tab, Purchases & Suppliers, is displayed in the MYOB export windows.

Setting up for first time use
You will need to export your supplier cards to MYOB first. First, flag any suppliers you do not want to export by clicking the 'Exclude from account export' checkbox on the Detail tab of supplier tab.
Next load all the unflagged suppliers into the browser: right click the browser and select Load all cards into browser. Then click the Export Suppliers button. This will create the export file SuppCardsYYYYMMDD.txt in your MYOB export file path.
Importing in MYOB is almost the same as outlined above in "Importing into MYOB":
·	Open MYOB. In the MYOB main menu, select File\Import date\Cards\Supplier cards. This will open the Import File window.
·	In the "Import file format" combo box, select "Comma-separated".
·	In the "First record is" combo box, select "Data record".
·	Click the Continue button.
·	In the next window that opens, navigate to the file path you select earlier and select the SuppCardsYYYYMMDD.txt file. Then click the Open button.
·	In the Import Data window that now appears click on the Match All button. Then click the Import button and you are done. You may now wish to move the text file to a new folder, and re-name it, to prevent it being accidentally imported a second time.
When new suppliers are added to Bookscan they will appear in the Supplier Export browser. You should export these to MYOB before exporting the purchases and credit claims.


Exporting purchases and credit claims
In the Purchases & Suppliers tab, the top right group box is Purchases export. This displays the date of the oldest transaction ready to be exported ('Start Date') and the date of the latest transaction ready to be exported ('End Date'). You can change the dates of the export to what you require (say, to the last month's transactions).
Note: MYOB will not import data dated before its lock date. You can enter the lock date here to ensure transactions dated prior to that date are re-dated so MYOB will import them.

Press the Load Purchases button. This will load the Purchases/Claims browser. Transactions whose supplier is not marked for '"no account export' will show a tick in the Use column. Only these records will be exported to MYOB. (The other records will be marked as 'not for export' after you click the Send to MYOB button). You can toggle the Use column value by double clicking it.

Importing into MYOB
Using the direct method
Press the Send to MYOB button.

Using the manual csv file method
Press the Send to MYOB button to create the PurchasesYYYYMMDD.txt file.
Importing in MYOB is almost the same as importing journals into MYOB:
·	Open MYOB. In the MYOB main menu, select File\Import date\Purchases\Service Purchases. This will open the Import File window.
·	In the Import file format combo box, select Comma-separated.
·	In the First record is combo box, select Data record.
·	Click the Continue button.
·	In the next window that opens, navigate to the file path you select earlier and select the PurchasesYYYYMMDD.txt file. Then click the Open button.
·	In the Import Data window that now appears click on the Match All button. Then click the Import button and you are done. You may now wish to move the text file to a new folder, and re-name it, to prevent it being accidentally imported a second time.


.topic 2550
If you wish to handle debtor payments in MYOB rather than in Bookscan, you can export your customer invoices and credits individually rather than as totaled journals.  You can set this option on the Financials tab of System Options.

Customer invoices & customers
If you have selected 'Export invoices individually' in System options, an extra tab, Invoices & Customers, is displayed in the MYOB export windows.

Setting up for first time use
You will need to export your customer cards to MYOB first. First, flag any customers you do not want to export by clicking the "No account export" checkbox on the Detail tab of the customer master.
Next load all the unflagged customers into the browser: right click the browser and select Load all cards into browser. Then click the Export Customers button. This will create the export file CustCardsYYYYMMDD.txt in your MYOB export file path.
Importing in MYOB is almost the same as outlined above in 'Importing into MYOB':
·	Open MYOB. In the MYOB main menu, select File\Import date\Cards\Customer cards. This will open the Import File window.
·	In the 'Import file format' combo box, select 'Comma-separated'.
·	In the 'First record is' combo box, select 'Data record'.
·	·Click the Continue button.
·	In the next window that opens, navigate to the file path you select earlier and select the CustCardsYYYYMMDD.txt file. Then click the Open button.
·	In the Import Data window that now appears click on the Match All button. Then click the Import button and you are done. You may now wish to move the text file to a new folder, and re-name it, to prevent it being accidentally imported a second time.
When new customers are added to Bookscan they will appear in the Customer Export browser. You should export these to MYOB before exporting the invoices and credits.



Exporting customer invoices and credits
In the Invoices & Customers tab, the top right group box "Invoices export". This displays the date of the oldest transaction ready to be exported ('Start Date') and the date of the latest transaction ready to be exported ('End Date'). You can change the dates of the export to what you require (say, to the last month's transactions).
If you have a multi store set up, you may wish to click the checkbox 'Add store code to invoice number'.

Press the Load Invoices button. This will load the Customer Invoices browser. Transactions whose customer is not marked for 'no account export' will show a tick in the Use column. Only these records will be exported to MYOB. (The other records will be marked as "not for export" after you click the Send to MYOB button). You can toggle the Use column value by double clicking it.

Importing into MYOB
Using the direct method
Press the Send to MYOB button.

Using the manual csv file method
Press the Send to MYOB button to create two files:  the InvoicesYYYYMMDD.txt file and the InvoicesCOGsYYYYMMDD.txt file (cost of goods sold).

Both the text files need to be imported into MYOB. The process is almost the same as importing journals into MYOB:
·	Open MYOB. In the MYOB main menu, select File\Import date\Sales\Service Sales. This will open the Import File window.
·	In the Import file format combo box, select 'Comma-separated'".
·	In the First record is combo box, select 'Data record'.
·	Click the Continue button.
·	In the next window that opens, navigate to the file path you select earlier and select the InvoicesYYYYMMDD.txt file. Then click the Open button.
·	In the Import Data window that now appears click on the Match All button. Then click the Import button. You may now wish to move the text file to a new folder, and re-name it, to prevent it being accidentally imported a second time.
·	For the InvoicesCOGsYYYYMMDD.txt file follow the same procedure for journal imports outlined in Importing Journals into MYOB above, except that you select the InvoicesCOGsYYYYMMDD.txt file.


.topic 1560

Bookscan allows you to create categories and sub-categories of your products for display on your web site.
The program also gives you a variety of ways to speed up adding products to your web categories and with a click of a button you can upload them to your web site.
If you wish, you can set up Bookscan to automatically update these categories as you add new products. See the Web Category Mapping section below.

Note: Before starting you will need to set the type of web site you are using. In System options, go to the Modules tab and select the website type in Web Site combo box.


Uploading products to your web site - a summary
·	Set up the main web categories. These might be Art & Architecture, History, Humour, Children's, Cooking, Fiction, Reference, Sport, Crime, Management, Romance and Best Sellers.
·	Within each main category, set up sub-categories. So the History category may have sub-categories of Ancient, European, American, Australian etc.



·	Add products to each sub-category. Products can belong to multiple sub-categories.
Manual method
In the Web Export window, enter products against each subcategory.
(You can do this one by one or you can select groups of products by department, imprint, Bookscan category, or Onix subject).
Automated method
In the Web Category Mapping window, you can link web sub categories to individual departments, imprints, Bookscan categories, or Onix subjects.
When creating new product codes in Bookscan, the product will automatically be added to the mapped web subcategory.
After the mapping has been completed you can do your initial loading of products into your web sub categories with just a few button clicks.
·	If you want to show Best Sellers on your, create and fill this category using the Best Sellers button on the Web Export window.
·	To export your categories to the web site, click on the Update Web button.
·	Open your web site and, in turn, click on these links in to complete the procedure:
§	Import Bookscan categories (skip this step if only updating products).
§	Import Bookscan titles
§	Import Bookscan main category links (skip this step if only updating products).



Web Export window

The Web Export window is opened from the main menu: Modules/ Web Export/ Web Export.



The window contains three browsers:
·	The first displays all the web main categories,
·	The second displays all the sub categories for the currently selected main category and
·	The third displays all the products on the currently selected subcategory.
To see all the columns in the products browser, it is recommended that you maximise the window.
You can choose to view either all products or only products not yet exported to the web using the 'Not Exported Only' check box.

NOTE:  All main and sub caterory names must be unique and cannot contain the characters listed below:
/ \ ' " & ( ) ,

Setting up web main categories
Note that to make your web site easy to use, it may be best to use at most, ten to fifteen main categories on your web site.
·    Click on the Add Main Category (F3) button
·	Enter the category name e.g. History in the main category field.
·	If you are going to display an icon or picture with this category, select the patch of the picture file in the Picture Path field. (Not relevant for e-web users)
·	Click on the Save (F12) button.
·	Add all your main categories in this fashion.

Setting up web sub-categories
·	Select a main category in the browser.
Click on the Add Subcategory (F4) button.
·	Enter the subcategory name e.g. Ancient History in the subcategory field.
·	Click on the Save (F12) button.
·	Add all your sub categories in this fashion.

Maintaining categories
·	You can edit a category name by clicking on the category in the browser and using the right mouse to open the context menu. Select Edit Category from the menu.
·	To delete a category, select it in the browser a select 'Delete Category' from the context menu. Note that when deleting a main category all its sub-categories and their products will also be deleted. Similarly deleting a sub-category deletes its products.

Changing the order of your main categories
Manual sorting
·	Right click on the window to open the context menu.
·	You will see that one of the two setting Double click to move UP and Double click to move DOWN.
·	Change the setting if required.
·	Double click on a main category to change its position in the list.

Automatic sort
You can sort your main categories alphabetically by opening the context menu and selecting 'Set main categories to alpha order'.

Note
Sub-categories appear in alphabetical order; their positions cannot be changed.

Adding a best sellers list
You do not need to manually create a best sellers category; the system will do this automatically.
·	Click on the Best Sellers (F11) button. A window will be displayed with the best sellers parameters.
·	Select:
o	The sales date range.
o	Whether you want the list based on quantity or profitability of sales.
o	The number of products in the list.
·	Click the Save Browser (F12) button (or if you're not happy with the list, the Discard Changes button).
·	The Best Sellers main category and sub-category will be created and the products loaded into the subcategory.	

Adding products to your web categories
You can add titles to a sub-Category manually by clicking Barcode (F2) or by scanning them in.  You can also map Departments, Imprints, Subjests or Categories directly to the Web Categories you have created & populate them automatically.  To do this see the Web Category Mapping page.


Upload to the web site
You are now ready to upload your categories and products to the web site. Instructions for users of the new Barcode Solutions e-Web web site follow immediately. Instructions for users of the earlier Barcode solutions web site and for other systems follow after that.

EXPORTING

Select the website type in Utilities - System Options - Modules tab, under the Web site section, middle left.


Also note; you can control which titles are uploaded by their publisher Status code using the Web flag in the Tables - Authority Tables - Status window.

Exporting to nopCommerce



Exporting to Other Sites

.topic 2830
EXPORTING: WooCommerce

Note: Uploads cannot be sent by machines running Windows XP.

Select Microsoft - Auto-update / Manual update, as preferred.

Initial setup for exporting

1. Registering WooCommerce libraries.

For Windows Vista/7/8/8.1/10
Run the supplied batch file: WooLibrary register. Run as Admin.bat by right clicking on it & selecting Run as administrator.


Alternatively, in the Windows destop search bar, type "cmd".  Right click on Command Prompt and select Run as Administrator.
Copy & Paste one of the following lines into the command prompt window depending on your version of Windows:
(To check your version, press [Windows]+[E], then in the File Explorer window, open the C:\ drive.  If the Program Files (x86) folder is there, you have 64 bit Windows, otherwise you have 32 bit.)

For 64 bit Windows - C:\windows\microsoft.net\framework\v4.0.30319\regasm "C:\program files (x86)\Bookscan\woolibrary.dll"
For 32 bit Windows: - C:\windows\microsoft.net\framework\v4.0.30319\regasm "C:\program files\Bookscan\woolibrary.dll"

If you need to unregister the library, please use the appropriate following command:

For 64 bit Windows: - C:\Windows\Microsoft.net\framework\v4.0.30319\regasm /unregister "C:\program files (x86)\Bookscan\woolibrary.dll"
For 32 bit Windows: - C:\Windows\Microsoft.net\framework\v4.0.30319\regasm /unregister "C:\program files\Bookscan\woolibrary.dll"

3. Set Defaults

Open the Set Defaults window by right clicking in the Web Export window, then clicking Set Defaults.



Set the image path in the Small Image Path field to where your images are stored in the Bookscan database.
Set the Jacket  FTP Server to the supplied ftp server path and
Set the Small and Large image Directories to /wp-content/uploads/
As shown below.
(The Custom Fields & Description field do not matter as they are used for the older e-Web uploads.)



Click Save(F12) when done.
Click on the Export to Web (F9) button.
Leave this window and Bookscan open & go to your web browser.

Web Site Settings

Log into your website with the administrator login & go to Users - Add New and create a new administrator login for yourself.  (Please set the Role to Administrator before clicking Add New User.)



After creating this, go to WooCommerce - Settings. Then select the Advanced tab & once the page loads, REST API, then click on Add Key.



Now enter a name for the new key, (eg. Uploads), the email for your admin user, select Read/Write from the dropdown selection and click Generate API Key.



Enter the Email used to create the new Administrator in the field marked Web site user ID:
Enter the Web Site URL the same as when opening the site in your browser.
Highlight the Public key with your mouse, right click on the test & select Copy.
Alt-Tab back to Bookscan and right click in the field marked Web Publickey and select Paste.
Highlight the Private key with your mouse, right click on the test & select Copy.
Alt-Tab back to Bookscan and right click in the field marked Web Secretkey and select Paste.
Tick the Remember passwords this machine (F3).




The Jacket user ID and Jacket password will be in the email with your site details.

You can now close your web browser if you like.

Setup is now complete, you can create a manual export by clicking Export (F12).

e-Comms will automatically update your web site when titles are updated, received or sold whenever it runs.




.topic 2850
EXPORTING: OTHER SYSTEMS

Export your categories
You are now ready to export your categories to the web site.
Note: If you have the Not Exported Only check box ticked, the system will offer to update the website by adding the new titles. (The export button will display Update Web (F9)). If the box is unchecked, the web site will be over written. (The export button will display Overwrite Web (F9)).
·	You can choose to export just the currently selected subcategory or the currently selected main category or all categories. Select the appropriate radio   button above the export button.
·	Click on the Overwrite Web (F9) button (or, if you are updating, Update Web (F9) button).
·	The web export files will be created and the products marked as exported.
·	For Barcode Solutions provided web sites, Bookscan e-Comms will load your web export files to your web ftp site.

Upload to the web site
These instructions are only for uploading into a Barcode Solutions provided web site.
·	Open the back office of your web site.
·	If you are loading for the first time, or have changed your main categories or sub categories click on the link: Import Bookscan categories.
·	To upload your products click on the link: Import Bookscan titles
·	If you are loading for the first time, or have changed your main categories or sub categories click on the link: Import Bookscan main category links.

Export file options
You can set various options for your web export files. In the Web Export window, open the context menu and select 'Set defaults'. The will open the Web Page Defaults pop-up window.





The optional exports are some the title master fields you may or may not want to export.
The stock availability options allow you to export either the stock on hand figure, no stock figures or a stock level message.
Export file can be in four different formats. For Barcode Solutions provided web sites, use the csv option.

Tab delimited exports
Note that the Optional Exports settings are ignored for tab delimited files. For thse files the field order is:
ISBN
Catalogue number
Short comment
Title
Edition
Selling price
RRP
Cost price
Jacket file name
Blurb
Publisher
Series
Available stock
Author
Illustrator
Year
Publication date
Binding (full binding name from the binding file)
Status (full status name from the status file)
Imprint (full imprint name from the imprint file)
Pages
Weight ( with measurement type defaulting to grams e.g. 250g )
Height ( with measurement type defaulting to 'mm' e.g. 200mm )
Width ( with measurement type defaulting to 'mm' e.g. 175mm )
Long comment





.topic 2680
You can map some or all of your imprints, Bookscan categories, departments and BIC subjects to your web categories. You can then load all your products into your web categories using this mapping. As products are added to the title master over time, the program will use the mapping to also add the products to your web export list. This will allow you to keep your web site up to date.

The Web Category Mapping window is opened from the main menu: Modules/ Web Export/ Web Category Mapping.



Before doing the mapping you will need to have set up your web categories in the Web Export window. See above for instructions on ding this.

Mapping departments
Select the Departments radio button. The Bowser will fill with all your departments.
As you highlight a department in the browser, it will display in the Link Department combo box. If you select a department in the combo box it will be shown as selected in the browser.
To link a department:
·	Select it in the browser or combo box.
·	Select the main category in the Main Category combo box. This will load that main category's sub-categories in the Sub-category combo box.
·	Select the sub-category.
·	Click the Link button.

In the example above HB NONFICTION has been linked to General Reference and MAPS has been linked to Atlases.

Other mapping
You can map your imprints, Bookscan categories and BIC subjects in the same way. You don't have to link them all; just what seems relevant.

Loading you products
After you have completed your mapping, you will need to load all your products to the web categories.
Open the Web Export window.
Open the context menu.
Select 'Load all titles from mapped databases'.
The browser will load with all the products mapped to the appropriate web categories.
Click the Update (F9) button to update the web site.

New products
As you add products to the title master, they will be automatically added to the web lists. Periodically you will need to open the Web Export window and export them to the web site.


.topic 199
In the Mail Out window you can create a mailing list for selected customers. This last may be in the form of:
·	mailing labels,
·	merge files
·	simple listings of customers and their addresses or
·	emails to the selected customers.
These options can be selected in the Produce combo box.

Customer lists can either be created in the window or loaded from files created earlier, either here, in customer rewards or when printing customer reports such as Most Profitable Customers and Best Customers.

Sending emails
If Email is selected in the Produce combo box, the Print button will be re-captioned Email. Clicking this button will open the Bookscan email window.



The selected customers' email addresses will be automatically loaded. You can add further email addresses manually.
Type a subject and a message in the appropriate fields and attach any files you want to send. Click the Send button to send the emails.	

Opening a saved customer mail out list:
·	Click on the Load List button. (If this button is not visible then you already have a list loaded. If so, click either the Save List or Clear List button first).
·	A standard Windows dialogue box will open where you can navigate to the file to be opened.
·	Select the file and click OK.
·	The browser will fill with the customer list.
Note that only mailout files created in Bookscan can be opened here.  (Mailout files can be created in the Customer Rewards module.)



Creating a customer list:
The report can be created from either:
·	the customer file,
·	customer categories.
·	editing a saved mailing list
·	adding customers manually

Creating a list using from the customer file
·	Click on the All Customers radio button.
·	All customers will be loaded into the browser.
·	You can then refine the list using the various filters etc described below.

Using customer categories		
·	Click on the Customers by Category radio button. This will enable the category fields.
·	Select categories using the Add Category combo box. The categories will be displayed in the Categories list box.
·	For complex expressions select the logical operator (AND, OR or AND NOT) from the Default Link combo box.
·	Then use the right mouse to add any brackets to the expression.

An example: To select customers from the Rewards category who are either also in the History or Gardening categories:
·	Select Rewards category.
·	Set the link to AND.
·	Select the History category.
·	Set the link to OR.
·	Select the Gardening category.
·	Right click on the History line in the list box and select opening bracket.
·	Right click on the Gardening line in the list box and select the close bracket.	 	
·	The browser will re-fill as you select each category or when a viable expression has been entered.
·	For complex expressions you can click on the Test Expression button to check for logical errors.  	

Using an existing mail out list
·	Open a saved mail out list as described above in Opening a saved customer mail out list.
·	Refine the list using the various filters etc described below.
·	Click on the Save List button and enter a name for the new file.

Adding customers one by one
·	Clear any existing file from the browser by clicking the Clear List button.
·	In the Add customer area, select customers in the usual way entering the customer code, shortcut or using the F2 button.
·	Click on the Save List button to save to file.

Filtering the customer list
Last sale parameters
You can use these options to select only those customers
·	ignoring when their last sale was ( All radio button ),
·	who have made sales since a selected date,
·	who have had no sales since a selected date
Select the appropriate radio button in the Last Sale Parameters box and then select the date.
Click on the Apply Sales Filter button to apply the filter.

Filters
You can also filter on:
·	customers  whose postcodes start with the same number,
·	debtors only,
·	mail-order customers only,
·	customers with email addresses,
·	customers without email addresses.

Manually selecting
Double click on the Use checkbox against a customer in the browser to de-select them. When you save the list, only customers with Use selected will be saved.
Alternatively you can use the contact menu to do this. The context menu will also allow you select/de-select all above and all below and selected record.

Sorting
You can sort the browser and the report by:
·	customer key ( default sort ),
·	surname
·	full customer name
·	post code.
To perform the sort, click on the required column heading in the browser.


.topic 2230
This module is an aid  to users who are putting together catalogues or promotional material. It allows the user to create lists of products and then export the list (and a selection of product fields) as a comma-delimited file (csv file) for importing into other programs such as Excel or Word. The window provides plenty of shortcuts for assembling  your lists and you can also save the list as a dbf file fro later use. You can add an unlimited amount of text against each title and automatically import text from either the title abstract field or from a blurb imported from the publisher.

Using the Catalogue window

Open the catalogue window from the main menu - select Modules/Catalogues.

Building a list of products
There is a variety of ways to create a list of products.

Import from a department, category, subject or imprint
Select a department category, subject or imprint in the appropriate combo box on the left side of the window.
Click on the Add to Browser button.
The products will be added to the browser. The program will check for items already in the browser, so you don't have to worry about duplications.
If you change your mind (before you add the products) you can clear the combo box fields by clicking the Clear Combos checkbox.

Adding product one by one
Add products by entering the barcode (or using one the standard shortcuts) in the barcode field.
You can use the F2 button to search for a product and the Recall (Alt F2) button to load the last used product.
Again, the program will ensure you don't duplicate a product in your list.

BestSellers
You can calculate what your best-selling products are and add them to yuor list.
Click on the Best Sellers button. This will open the Create Best Seller List window.
Select the sales date range you require.
Click on one of the radio buttons to select either best sellers by quantity or your most profitable products.
Enter the number of records you want to import.
Click the OK button.
The best sellers will be added to your list.
Again, the program will ensure you don't duplicate a product in your list.

Product data

When you add products to your list the following fields are copied from yuor master file:

Product code (ISBN)		Title			Author
Binding				Selling price		Abstract*
Jacket path			Imprint			Dimension (eg 250 x 150 x 25mm)
No of pages			Release date		Publisher
Subject

If you already have a list, you can update it for any changes in the title master (except for the abstract and product code fields). Just click on the Update from Master button to perform the update.

*In your catalogue file there is a text file where you can store any text about the product that you wish. When adding products to the browser you can choose to automatically fill this text field from either the abstract field on the Catalogue tab on the title master or from the Blurb/Reviews field on the Publisher tab or from neither of these.The Abstract combo box you can set one of the following:
		None (don't load any abstracts)
		Use master abstact
		Use publisher review
		Publisher review if no master abstract
		Master abstract if no publisher review.
The combo box will be set to whatever you used last time (on that computer).

Editing the abstract field
Double click on the Abstract column of the browser.
The Catalogue Abstracts window will open. This will display the title master abstract and the blurb/reviews field from the publisher tab in the top text fields. The lower text field displays the catalogue file abstract.
You can append or overwrite the catalogue file abstract by clicking on the Append or Overwriet buttons.
You can also just type in (or cut and paste) any text you want.
Click on the Save button to save youy cahnges to the Catalogue file. To discard yuor changes click the cancel button.
Note that any changes you type in the upper text fields are not saved back to the title master.

Saving and loading files

Saving a catalogue list
Once you have assembled a list of products you can save it for later use.
Just click on the Save List button and save the file as you would for any Windows file.
The file will be saved with an extension of .dbf.

Clearing the Browser
To clear the browser, click on the Clear Browser button. warning - any unsaved data will be lost.

Loading a List
To load a list click on the Load List button and navigate to the dbf file you wish to open (not the csv file!).
You may need clear the browser first before the Load List button appears.

Export field selection
You can select which of the fields (listed above) that you wish to export to the csv file. The default for new users is all fields;  teh program will then remember which fields you chose last time (on that computer).
Click on the Field Selection button. This will open the Field Selection dialogue window.
Use the arrow buttons or double click on a field name in the one of the list boxes to select ot deselect it.
Click Save to save your changes or Exit to discard your changes.

Creating the CSV file
To create a comma-delimited text file, click on the Export button and save the file as you would for any Windows file.
The file will be saved with an extension of .csv.							

.topic 194
Customer rewards, or loyalty, programs are a popular way of encouraging repeat sales. Bookscan allows you to define a rewards program. It will track your sales for each customer and allow you to reward your customers based on these sales.

Rewards programs are set up and managed in the Customer Rewards window which is opened from the main menu: Modules/ Rewards. This window contains five tabs:

Select rewards program
This is a simple browser allowing you to select which rewards program you wish to work on. If you are using only the one rewards program you won't need to refer to this tab. Otherwise just click on the required program and then select the tab you wish to work in.

Define reward programs tab
This tab allows you to set up or amend a rewards program.

Program specials tab
This tab allows you to enter different items to give special prices on these items for members of a reward program.

Payment/contract tab
This will be your main working area in rewards. Here you create the list of customers to be rewards, produce your mail out list and customer letters and where you produce the rewards.

Old records
In this tab you can look at your rewards history and purge old records.
The browser can be filtered to display only customers rewarded on a selected date by selecting that date in the Date Rewarded field.

Customer Rewards: Define Programs

Rewards programs are defined in the Define reward programs tab of the Customer Rewards window.



There are buttons to add, save, delete and copy a reward program. Multiple reward programs are allowed.

Adding a program
Click on the Add Program button and complete the various fields:.

·	Program name: Give the reward program a name

·	Base criterion -> Base criterion for how the rewards program will calculate rewards. There are two options:
o	$Amount Net (Rewards will be based on the dollar amount of sales)
o	Purchase Quantity (Rewards will be based on the quantity of items sold)

·	Reward Percentage: This is the percentage of total sales that will be used to calculate the reward amount.

·	Round Reward To: As the final reward amount is calculated from a percentage, it may not be a whole dollar amount, so you can specify a dollar amount here that the final reward amount is rounded to.

·	Program Start: The start date of this reward program.

·	Program End: The last date of this reward program. If you want the program to go on indefinitely, then leave this blank.

·	Maximum rewarded: The maximum amount of sales that this program will reward.

·	Minimum rewarded: The minimum amount of sales that this program will reward. If using Instant Rewards this is the threshold at which "points", (the customer's previous purchase value), becomes redeemable as a reward in subsequent purchases.

·	Disqualify Stops: Set this flag to prevent customers who have been put on stop from being rewarded.

·	Include GST in reward: You can choose to base rewards amounts on sales either including or excluding GST.

·	Vouchers to be issued for rewards: If this is checked then vouchers will be printed as part of rewards processing.

·	Voucher report form: Set the path to the report form used to print the rewards vouchers. The voucher form can be modified to suit your company.

·	Membership type: The type of membership required for this rewards program. There are three types:
1.	Not required,
2.	Renew on program date,
3.	Renew each <n> months,
Select not required if you don't need membership to reward programs.
If you select option 2 or 3 then the "membership setup" button will be enabled.
In this case press the "membership setup" button, to enter the renewal date and cost of the membership fee as shown below.
	

·	Category selection: You can use Bookscan categories to define which customers are eligible for, or members of a reward program. The browser on the right of the window displays a list of all categories. Select those categories which define eligibility for the program. By default all categories will be selected. If you don't wish to use categories to define customer eligibility, tick the Ignore categories checkbox.

·	You can set selected customers to be always included (or always excluded) from a reward program. Click on the Always Include or Always Exclude button to set these.

·	Scan freebie: If you are giving away a product as part of the customer reward, enter the product code in this field.

·	There is also a check box. "When a sale qualifies under multiple programs pay highest"
·	As you can have multiple reward programs if a customer qualifies for multiple programs, then this check box will ensure that they get the highest reward amount. If this is unchecked then they will get the lowest amount.

Rewarding customers
Rewards are managed in the Payment tab of the Customer rewards window.

Step 1: Create a customer list
Select the start and end date of your rewards period and then click on the Prepare Rewards List button. This will do all the reward calculations based on the criterion that were entered into the Define reward programs tab.
Once this has finished, a list of customers who have qualified for rewards and how much they will be rewarded will be displayed in the browser

Step 2 Edit the rewards list
If you wish you and now edit the customer list by clicking on the appropriate buttons:

Remove Cust From List
Highlight a customer in the rewards list then click on this button to remove them so they will not be rewarded.

Mark Rewarded
This will mark all customers sales in the rewards list generated as rewarded. Used when you are starting a new reward program and you want to clear out the existing sales for customers.

Customer Detail
Highlight a customer in the rewards list then click on this button to show their detailed customer record.

Step 3 Print list
Here you can print a listing of the customers in the browser and/or create a mail out list of the customers listed.
If you are creating a mail out file you will need to name the file (and select the file path) in the field below the Mailout file checkbox. This is a standard Windows selection field. Click on the button at the end of the field and browse to the folder where you wish to store the file. Then either select a file there to overwrite or enter a new file name.

Step 3 Finalise
When you are happy with the generated rewards list, click the Produce Rewards button to produce the rewards reports and vouchers to reward your customers with.
When finalising is completed the browser will clear. You will now be able to review these records in the Old Records tab.




You can also view the rewards earned by an individual customer from the customer master window.



At the bottom left of the window is a button labeled "Memberships/Rewards".
This is also where memberships are updated for each customer. Once you have selected the desired customer click on the button to bring up the following window.



This will bring up a list of rewards programs that have been defined. Highlight the one you are interested in. You can then click on the "Update Membership" button to update their membership if required.

To view the sales for a particular customer, open the customer master window and search for the customer. Then open or go to the "Purchases Tab". This shows a list of items sold to this customer.
To view only the unrewarded sales check the "Unrewarded sales only" check box and you will only see the sales that have not been rewarded yet.
You can click the "Total" button at any time to total these individual sales and give a total amount.

Finally at the top of this tab is the label "Unrewarded portion of rewarded sales". When you reward a customer at a certain dollar amount, if the customers sales go over this amount then the difference will be carried over into this field and added to their next reward.

If "Unrewardsd sales only" is ticked, you can also see the totals of the customers rewardable sales, GST on those sales, quantity of items towards the rewards and unrewarded items.






.topic 1570

The Bookscan Academic module is used to assist in calculating order quantities for textbooks used in school, college and university courses.
It allows you to keep track of the following data:
Lecturers and the courses they teach
Textbooks and other materials used on the courses
Student numbers for  these courses.

Summary of the Academic module procedures	
Setting up a course
Attaching lecturers to a course
Maintaining student numbers and rolling over figures at year/semester end.
Course texts -adding and editing
Placing orders
Academic reports

In the following screen-shot an existing course has been selected, and its details are showing in the various fields.


Course Details
 An existing course can have been selected either from the drop-down list of the Select Course combo-box or by using the Find Course By Lecturer button.
The course details are displayed in the various fields.

Course History
In the Rolls box the history of student numbers for the course is displayed
Next to the faculty Phone number field is a combo-box by which you may choose to view either five or ten slices of history (these slices are nominally referred to as years but the figures can be rolled with whatever frequency is desired).
When the course is being set up, you may enter as much historical information as you prefer.  From that point forward, each time the course information is rolled the existing data will move one column to the right.

Lecturers
The list of lecturers attached to this course is displayed and edited  by clicking on the Lecturers (F5) button.

Course Texts
The textbooks set  for this course are displayed in the browser.
Current set texts are displayed on  a white background, recommended titles on yellow and deleted titles on cyan.
To edit any of these lines double click on the line in the browser. The browser will then be hidden and the titles detail fields displayed.
To save your changes and return to the browser view, click on the Save Text (F9) button.
You can also scroll through all the texts using the Previous (F11) and Next (F12) buttons. When you use these buttons any changes you make to a text will be saved.
To discard any changes, click on the Cancel button (or  press the Escape key )

Buttons
Add Course (F3)	Add a new course
Delete Course 	Delete a course
Edit Course (F4) 	Edit a course's details

Lecturers (F5)	To display or  attach lecturers to the course.
Edit Rolls (F2)	Edit the course's student numbers and history.
Title Details (F2)	To display the master record of the selected title.  The Courses tab of the master record can be used to show all courses on which the title appears.
Marketing (F7)	An on-screen report of sales by marketing type for the currently selected title.

Add Text (F9)	To add text(s) to the course.
Delete Text	To delete a text from the course.
Order Text (F11)	To transfer current order values to the Draft Purchase Orders or to zero the current order values.  Items added to the Draft are left on hold and show a source of "Te".
History (F8)	An on-screen report of the currently selected title's sales history.

Right mouse options
Edit Rolls 	Edit the course's student numbers and history.
Add Course 	Add a new course.
Change Course Code 	Change the course code of the currently selected course.
Delete Course 	Delete a course.
Reports 	Print one of the 5 available Academic reports.
Period Sales Display	Display a floating window of the currently selected text's sales history.

End of Year Rollover	Roll over the student numbers and history at year end.

Show all items 	Have the browser display all texts for a course.
Hide dropped items 	Have the browser display only current texts.
Show only dropped 	Have the browser display only dropped texts.


.topic 1580

Bookscan can be configured for either a retail environment or for a publisher or distributor. The main feature of the publisher/distributor configuration is the warehousing module:

Customer orders
Customer orders are entered into the Order Entry window to create picking slips. These can be printed in the warehouse via the picking window. When the stock is picked it is scan packed at the packing station using the Packing window. Customer labels are printed and then the invoice is created and despatched with the goods.
You can have the program automatically link multiple picking slips for each customer allowing you to process all the orders for customer and so saving you freight.
The Order Entry window also monitors credit limits, and controls small orders, either adding small order surcharges or holding small orders until further orders are received.
See the Order Entry chapter for details.

Backorders
Where there is insufficient stock to fill a customer order line, the product is backordered (as opposed to creating special orders in the retail system). As the backorder is created, so too is a draft purchase order for the product. As stock is received to cover backorders, backorders can be released in the Backorder release window.
Pricing backorders
You can arrange to have the backorders automatically re-priced to reflect the latest prices. This is a very handy feature when you want to take orders on a new title but don't yet have a price for it. It is also useful where you are bringing in products from overseas and, because of fluctuating exchange rates, you don't want to set a price until the stock arrives. See the Re-pricing backorders section below.

Picking Slip Control  The program has a picking slip control window allowing managers to monitor warehouse activity.

Packing
For the packing stations, the program has a dispatch window where you scan in each product as you pack it. This ensures the accuracy of your shipments. It also prints the carton labels, allows recording of the shipping details and charges, creates the invoice and, for EDI orders, electronically transmits the ASN (advanced shipping notes).
The program caters for Coles Myer central warehouse electronic invoicing and labeling.

Setting up carriers
Set up each of your carriers (road freight, air freight, post, etc). This will enable you to record the shipment method and the consignment note against each invoice. You may also wish to set up quasi-carriers such as "Pick up", "Delivered by rep"  and so on.

Customers with multiple branches (e.g Coles Myer)
Electronic orders from customers with multiple stores or DCS.






.topic 1590

The Picking Slip Control window is used by the store persons to print out picking slips. It is also used my managers to monitor the warehouse work that is outstanding.

The window is opened from the main menu: Modules/ Warehousing/ Picking.
The window header will display:
·	a summary of all unprinted picking slips and
·	a summary of picking slips that are being picked but have not yet been packed and invoiced.
The browser will default to listing all unprinted picking slips.

Printing picking slips
Select the picking slips to be printed and press the Print button (F12).
You can select picking slips in several ways:
·	A single line - click on it
·	Multiple lines - hold the Control key down and click on the lines required.
·	A group of lines - click on the first line while holding down the Shift key. Click on the last line of the group. All intervening lines will be selected.
·	First five lines - click on the Next 5 Lines button (F5). Clicking on the button again will add the next five to the selection.
·	Clearing selections - click on the Clear Selections button (F6) or just click on another line in the browser.

Held picking slips
Picking slips below the minimum order level are 'held" so that they can't be printed. Held picking slips display a tick in the Held column of the browser. You can manually set a picking slip as held by double clicking on it.

Reprinting
Click on the Show Printed button.  The browser will display all printed but uninvoiced picking slips. Select the picking slips and click the Print button (F12). Click on the Finish Reprinting button when finished.

Forward orders
Forward order picking slips are not displayed in the browser until the forward order date. Then they are treated as standard picking slips.
To display forward orders that are not yet due, click on the Forward Orders button (F8). The summary fields in the header will now show the totals only for forward orders.  The browser will display only outstanding forward orders.  The picking slips can be printed in the usual way. Click the Hide Fwd Orders button when finished.

Stopped Accounts
Picking slips for customers whose accounts are on stop are displayed in red in the browser. These picking slips will not print until the customer is taken off stop.


.topic 1600
Note: the steps below detail the procedures for packing standard orders. For orders for multiple stores, shipped to distribution centres (DCs), such as Coles Myer, the procedures are slightly different. See the Coles Myer section below details.

At each packing station, stores persons use the Packing window as they pack customer orders. As the barcode of order items are scanned, the program checks the product code and the quantity against the order. Packing labels are printed as each carton is filled. When finalising the order, the program will alert the packer to any items not yet packed. The packer has the option of add the missing items or, if they represent warehouse shortages, finalising the order. In this latter case, the program will backorder the missing items and the shortage flag on those products. As the order is finalised the invoice is created and printed for dispatch with the goods.

Detailed instructions
The Packing window is opened from the main menu: Modules/ Warehousing/ Packing.
·	In the Scan picking slip combo down box, scan the picking slip's barcode.
o	To consolidate a customer's orders into one shipment, just scan any subsequent picking slips for this customer.
o	The scanned slips numbers will be displayed below the drop down box.
o	The order lines for the picking slips will be displayed in the browser.
Note: You will not be able to process picking slips for customers who are on stop.
·	Press the F5 key to start packing (or click the Start button).
·	Scan the barcode of each product as you pack it into the carton.
·	The Quantity is automatically set to 1.
·	For multiple quantities you can overtype the actual quantity.
·	Press F12 to save the line (or click the Save Line button).



·	After you fill a carton press the F8 key (or click the Carton Full button). The Shipping Details window will open.
o	For the first carton, select the Carrier and enter the Consignment Note.  These will be displayed when this window is subsequently opened.
o	If a Freight charge is to be levied on the order, enter it here.
o	You may also record the weight and size of the carton if required for this carrier.
o	Click Save when done. A carton label to be printed and the carton number incremented.
·	When all items for the customer have been packed, click the Post button. If the order has been set for Invoice with goods, the invoice will now print. Otherwise the ASN will be created and electronically despatched to the customer.

Features
Unpacked items
If you try to post the order without it all being packed, the system will display a message 'Warning Not all lines have been packed. Backorder unpacked lines?'.
·	If have been unable to locate the stock and wish to send the rest of the order click on the Yes button.
o	The invoice will be created only for the lines packed.
o	All items not despatched will be place on backorder and the master file flagged as having a stock shortage.
·	If you click on the No button, the browser will display all the lines not yet packed. To resume packing press the F5 key (or click the All Lines button).

Unpacking from or adding to a carton
To edit what you have packed in a carton, click on the Edit Carton (F6) button. The contents of the current carton will be displayed in the browser.
·	To select a different carton use the arrow keys beside the carton number.
·	To edit an item double click on the line in the browser to copy it into the edit line.
·	Type in the corrected quantity
·	Press F12 to save the line (or click the Save Line button).
·	To resume packing press the F5 key (or click the Resume button).

Singles
If you just want to scan each item as you pack it without being able to type in multiple quantities, click on the Singles checkbox (or press the F9 key). This can speed up entering the data as there is then no need to press the F12 key after scanning each item.

Pallets
To palletise an order, click on the Palletise button.
The pallet number will be set to 1 and four pallet labels will be printed, to be placed on each face of the pallet after it is shrink-wrapped.
As each subsequent pallet is filled, click on the Next Pallet button.


.topic 176
In the Order Entry window, if there is insufficient stock to fulfill an order line, a backorder is created. As stock subsequently becomes available, you will need to release these backorders, creating picking slips for the orders.
The Backorder Release window is accessed via the main menu - Modules/ Warehousing/ Backorder Release.
Note that it is best to maximise window when you are working on it to display all the columns of the browser.
The window displays a browser listing all backorders in the system



Backorders are released against the oldest order first until all available stock is exhausted. However you can prevent individual backorder lines being released (setting them as Held), release backorders only for a selected customer or product code and restrict the maximum quantity to be released to any one order.

Backorders Browser
The browser displays the customer backorders in the system.
There are three methods of filtering the browser display:
·	All backorders
·	By customer: display only backorders for the customer selected in the Customer field.
·	By product: display only backorders for the product selected in the Product field.

Sorting the browser
Where all backorders are displayed, you can change the sort order by clicking on the appropriate column header.
·	Pick number			Sort chronologically
·	Date				Sort chronologically
·	Customer key or customer	Sort in customer key order
·	Product code or Title		Sort by product code

Releasing backorders
Backorders are released by clicking on the Release (F12) button. Backorders will only be released for those lines displayed in the browser.
So if you have displayed backorders only for a particular customer, then only that customer's backorders will be released.
Similarly if you are showing only backorders for a certain product then clicking on the Release (F12) button will release backorders only for that product.
If All Backorders is selected then a full backorder release will be done.

Holding backorders
To prevent a backorder from releasing, you can set it to held by double clicking its checkbox in the Held column. To remove the flag double click on the check box again.
To hold all displayed lines, right click to display the context menu and select Hold All.
To remove the held flag on all lines in the browser, click on the Remove Held button.
To remove the held flag on all lines, not just those in the browser, check the Remove all Held checkbox and then click on the Remove Held button.
An example: you want to release a single line for a customer.
	Move the cursor to the Customer field and enter the customer key.
	Right click on the browser and select Hold All.
	Double click on the Held checkbox of the line you want to release
	Click on the Release (F12) button

Stopped Accounts
You can prevent stock being allocated to order for accounts which are on stop by checking the No allocation to customers on stop check box.

Linking
If the Consolidate Pick Slips option in System Options has been selected, released backorders will be automatically linked to any unprinted picking slips for that customer.
If the total value of these orders is below the minimum order value, the released order will be flagged as held.
If the released order brings the total value of the customer's current orders to above the minimum, then all the held flags will be automatically removed and the customer orders will be available for despatch.

Backorder reports
There are three backorder reports that can be run from this window and from Bookscan Reports. These are:
·	All Backorders (sorted by date, customer or product code).
·	For a single customer.
·	For a single product code.
To run the reports, select either the customer or the product to display them in the browser and then click on the Print (F11) button.
For all backorders, select the All Backorders option. If required change the sort order by clicking on the appropriate column header (as outlined above). Then click on the Print (F11) button.

Handling backorders where there is insufficient stock
Where there is insufficient stock to cover all backorders for a certain product, you can limit the maximum quantity to be allocated to each order.
Select the product in the product field and then enter the maximum quantity you want allocated any order in the Max/Order field. Then click on the Release (F12) button.

Stock availability
You can set a stock availability message against each status type in the Status Maintenance window (main menu: Tables/Authority tables/ Status).
The message will print as the backorder reason against each backorder line of your invoice. For example you may set 'temporarily out of stock' against the 'active' status.
In the Backorder release window, this message displays in the Out of stock reason column of the browser. Next to it is a column showing the due date from your supplier.
You can edit these fields by double clicking on them. This opens the Availability pop-up window.





.topic 182

You can arrange to have the backorders automatically re-priced to reflect the latest prices. This is a very handy feature when you want to take orders on a new title but don't yet have a price for it. It is also useful where you are bringing in products from overseas and, because of fluctuating exchange rates, you don't want to set a price until the stock arrives

Summary
·	A title's re-price flag is set to true in the title master.
·	Backorders are taken against the product with the customer's discount set.
·	When the items come into stock, the price is set in the title master.
·	Then when the backorder is released, the pricing on the orders will be calculated based on the new price and the discount set when the order was taken..

Detailed steps
Title Master window
In the Extra Fields tab of the Title Master window, tick the Re-price field .
If you wish, you can also set the Auto lift re-price flag. This will cause the Re-price flag to be automatically removed as soon as stock for it is received. If the product is a new release you would set the Auto lift flag to true. If the product is regularly brought in from overseas and re-priced each time as the exchange varies, set the flag to false.
(You can set the default setting of this flag in the Titles tab in System Options).

Order Entry window
When entering backorders for products flagged as "re-price", a red message will be displayed in the edit line Re-price on release.



Just save the line as you normally would and it's all done - the backorders will be flagged to be re-priced during backorder release.
However there are a few options:
·	If  you can partially supply a line (e.g. the order is for ten and you have three in stock), you will be given an option when saving the line, of whether you want the backorders re-priced or sent out at the existing price.
·	If you re-set the Sell price then the pricing and discounts used will be those you type in - in other words the re-pricing is cancelled.
·	If you leave the Sell and Price fields as they are and just amend the Discount field, then that discount will be taken off the re-priced amount. (For example, if you enter a discount of 10% and the product is later re-priced at $100, then the customer will be charged $90).
·	If you amend the Price field and leave the Sell and Discount fields as they are then, the product will be charged at that price, although the RRP will be later updated.

Receiving window
When stock is received, the price will be set or updated in the title master.
If the Auto lift re-price flag has been set, the Re-price flag will be removed against the product.

Backorder Release window
During backorder release, the prices will be re-calculated to exactly the same values as if you were now entering the order in invoice entry.

Warning
Information on re-pricing is stored in the picking slip tables. Setting a titles re-price flag after the backorder has been created will not cause it to be re-priced. The flag must be set at the time the order is first entered.


.topic 2720
The bin locations option forms part of the warehousing module. It allows you to map your warehouse locations using different bin types (say standard, oversize, fast sellers etc) and automatically assigns an appropriate picking location to each product as it is received into stock. After receiving stock, you can print a 'putting away' report listing the received stock against it locations. Note that the location mapping is one to one: one location per product.

Setting up
System Options
In System Options, select the Options tab and tick the "Use bin locations" checkbox.

Location Types
Open the Bin Location Types window from the main menu: Tables/Authority Tables/Warehouse Bin Locations/Bin Types.

The default bin location (which has an empty bin code field) will have been automatically created for you.
Add any other bin types you require.
If some bin types are related to the shape of the product, you should map the bin type against the binding. In the example below, the binding  'Outsize' has been mapped against the 'OS' bin type code.



Now when automatically allocating a bin for products with this binding, it will be an 'Oversize' bin.

Warehouse bin location mapping
Warehouse locations should be in the format row, shelf and column slot: 99XX-9. For example 04AG-3 represents the bin in row 4, shelf AG and column slot 3.
Now you need to set up your warehouse bin locations.
Excel method
The easiest way to do this is to set them up in Excel in two columns: bin number and bin type. This way you can use Excel's auto-numbering and other features.



The above example shows locations standard (or default) locations 77QQ-1 and  77QQ-4 .and. oversize locations 77QQ-2 and  77QQ-3.
To load the file open the Warehouse Mapping window from the main menu: Tables/Authority Tables/Warehouse Bin Locations/Bin Locations. Click on the Load CSV File button and select the csv file. The BinLocs table will fill with the bin locations and display in the browser on the left.


Alternate method
You can create locations in the Bin Locations window.



Enter the row, shelf and slot ranges and select the required bin type. Press the Create Location button. The BinLocs table will fill with the range of bin locations and display in the browser on the left.

Editing locations
The bin locations browser can display in three modes: all, allocated and unallocated.
Unallocated view
When unallocated locations are displayed you can:
Delete locations - select the locations in the browser and click the Delete Locations button.
Change the bin types- select the locations in the browser, select the new bin type in the left-side combo box and click the Change Bin Type button.

Allocated view
When unallocated locations are displayed, the right side browser is enabled and displays the selected location's product. You can remove the product from the location by clicking the Remove ISBN button.

Allocating stock to a location

Master file
You can manually add, change or remove a location in the Details tab of  the Title Master window.



The Locations field is read only. To edit it, press the F3 key to open the Bin Allocation window.
Editing a location
For title that have already been allocated a bin number, the Bin allocation window will display the following:
The current location.
The bin type of that location.
A browser listing the available locations for the selected bin type. Changing the bin type in the Bin Type combo box will change the display in the browser.
The 'Move to' field will display the first available alternate location if you wish to move locations.
As you select a different bin in the browser, it will display in the 'Move to' field.
To change the location to that field, click the Save (F12) button.
To remove the product from the current location, select the Remove from location (F5) button and click the Save F12 button.

Allocating a location
If a title has not been allocated a bin location:
The current location will display 'No location set'.
The Bin Type field will display the bin type mapped against that product's binding. It it is not mapped the default bin type will be displayed.
A browser lists the available locations for the selected bin type. Changing the bin type in the Bin Type combo box will change the display in the browser.
The 'Move to' button will be re-captioned to 'Set Location' and the text field will display the next available location for the selected bin type.
As you select a different bin in the browser, it will display in the 'Set Location' field.
To allocate the product to the selected location, click the Save (F12) button.

Receiving
In the Receiving window, bin locations will be automatically allocated against unallocated products. You can also re-allocate a bin location here.



When a product code is entered in the edit line, the program check if a bin had been allocated to that product. If it has, it displays the location in the 'Loc' field; otherwise it allocates the next available location mapped against that product's binding and displays it in the 'Loc' field.

You can change this location by pressing the F11 key and opening the Bin Allocation window. As in the Title Master you can allocate a different location by selecting it in the Available Locations browser.

In the example above, the product's binding has been mapped against the default bin type. To allocate it to a 'fast movers' bin instead, select 'Fast movers' in the bin type combo box. The Available Locations browser will change to display 'fast movers' locations only and the Set Location field will display the first available bin. Click the Save Changes (F12) button to allocate the product to the new location.

In the main, stores people can ignore the Locations field and let just let the computer do the allocating.

Receiving EDI Orders
In the Receiving EDI Orders window, bin locations will be automatically allocated against unallocated products. If you wish you could change the alloaction after saving the stock into the receiving window or change it in the Title Master.

Putting away lists
After receiving stock, and before posting it, you should print putting away lists. This will list all the received stock from a selected supplier, in bin location orders:


The report can be printed from the main menu: Purchasing/Receiving/Receiving Reports/Putting Away Report. You can also print it when printing the GRN report.










.topic 1610

 The pre-pack module assists booksellers in partnering schools to deliver required books (and other items such as stationery and school levies  -  collectively known as booklists) to the students.

Select Modules\Pre-pack, from Bookscan's main menu, and you will open a submenu of six items.  They represent the major components of developing, selling, ordering and being paid for book-lists.  They will be disabled if the module is not installed.  To install Pre-pack, select System Options from the Utilities menu.  (The option is grayed out if any other Bookscan windows are opened.)  Click the tab with the caption Modules and check the Pre-pack control.  Checking it will enable some other controls which help to tailor the way that Pre-pack operates.

The pre-pack submenu gives you access to these components:

	A:	Developing book-lists.
	B:	Logging the students' requests.
	C:	Packing and invoicing
	D:	Ordering
	E:	Pre-pack Reports
	F: 	Year Rollover

		Entering a book-list

.topic 1620


Select System Options from the Utilities menu.  (The option is grayed out if any other Bookscan windows are opened.)

Click the tab with the caption Modules and mark the Pre-pack check-box.  This will enable the following controls:

Generate Item IDs automatically:  When a Title is included in a book-list for the first time, it can be given an unique ID Number (some sellers call it a Stock Number) to provide a means of identifying it (more rapidly than having to data-enter the ISBN).  Once this has happened, any ISBN-input will find that title if the ID-Number entered is prefixed by "<" (no quotes).  Bookscan will generate sequential numbers if this option is checked, otherwise you will be prompted to enter your own each time one is needed.

Treat Students as Debtors:  If you process thousands of students and don't want them to clutter your debtor reports, leave this unchecked!  In the  current version this setting only affects student identification in the customer table.

Reward Pre-pack Sales:  By default, the customer-loyalty processes ignore sales made through pre-pack.

Discount for 2nd-hand in good condition:  Defaults to 33.33%.

Discount for 2nd-hand in poor condition:   Defaults to 66.66%.

.topic 1630

Every item (aside from comments) which goes into a book-list must have a corresponding entry in the master table (i.e.: effectively, it must have an ISBN).  You may wish to enter all of these before you start.

You may also wish to enter school details in advance (which can be done by selecting Tables\Authority Tables\Schools from the main menu) but they can be added "on the fly" from the book-list building window.  Similarly, you may prefer to enter the Subjects and their Key Learning Areas in advance.  The main-menu selection for this is just above the one for Schools.

With the preliminaries out of the way, begin entering a book-list by identifying the school (either from the combo-box or by clicking the button to its right, marked with ellipsis, by which new schools can be added).

Then enter the class' year-number.  As you tab off that field, Bookscan will point out that the class does not yet exist (unless it does  -  in which case you will see the list's items in the bottom, "browser" pane) and will offer to create one.  With that done you can start clicking the big, "Add Item To List" button.



The (above-mentioned)Item window can be reopened at any time by double-clicking on the row for the item that you wish to edit excepting that, if you double-click certain columns, there are special results.  The columns with their own results are:
	Seq:	 	Adjust the item's position in the list.
	C:	 	Edit a comment attached to the current line.
	Subject: 	Change the item's subject.
	Order:    	Edit the pending-order quantity.

Most commands that you will need, to assemble the lists, are found on the right mouse-button's pop-up menu.  Its two submenu's (one for Items and one for Book-lists) have most of the goodies.  Under Items you can delete any line no longer needed.  And you can add a line which is just a comment.  This sort of comment is not restricted to the "Comments" column, when the book-list is printed.  It comes out much as it appears on-screen.  Note that comment-lines should be given the same Subject as their adjacent item in order to help with the logical grouping of lines by the reports.

Under Book-lists (on the mouse-menu) you can Delete a whole book-list, Copy one (to a new School/Year), jump to the Ordering window or Re-sequence the current list.  Re-sequencing is important once the book-list has been completed and the items sorted into their final order.  Never re-sequence a list after you have started taking orders for it!

After entering a draft list, run the Worksheets report.  This provides a listing of what you understand the school's requirements to be and features plenty of white space (and prompts) for their further comments.  The report can be sorted by Key Learning Area, for convenient distribution to course masters.  The reports can be selected by clicking the printer icon on the tool-bar.

The Report Form input (above the "browse" pane) allows advanced users to produce varied output for different schools (or even different years within a school).  To do this, you must make a copy of the default report-form (the file named in the edit control), under a different name, and save that new name using the edit-control.  Each booklist takes on, as its default, the form assigned to its school.  Any form can be changed using the standard reporting tools provided by Barcode Solutions.

Once the work-sheets are returned, and the final changes put in place, re-sequence the list and you are ready to print it, for distribution to students.

	Logging the students' requests

.topic 1640

Pre-pack ordering can be approached in a number of ways.  The order-arrangement window can be opened from either the Book-list or the Students Maintenance windows.  It can also be opened from the Unders/Overs report-preparation window or from Bookscan's main menu.

Once you are viewing the book-list item of interest, double-clicking in the Next Order column lets you enter the number to be ordered.

The Ordered column displays how many unit-orders have been finalised for this item so far (this year).  The Avail column shows how many units are on-hand and the last column recalls the previous year's order.

The selection controls, at the top of the window, can vary each others' effect.  For example, if we clicked the AXIOMS OF GEOMETRY FOR CALARE PUBLIC SCHOOL Year 4 radio-button and then checked the View/order across all book-lists check-box, the list would show that title wherever it was used by any book-list.  If we then looked at the higher radio-button, its caption would read All items for all booklists.  If you pressed that button, all items on all book-lists would be listed.  You could limit this selection by item-type as well, using the Item-type combo-box (to view only books or just stationery).  Single-clicking (selecting) an item from the list changes the lower radio-button prompt to pertain to that title  -  so these controls combine to give access to any item on any list and to group related orders smartly.

Displaying the group (or single item) that you need to order, click the Place Order button.  Bookscan asks for confirmation of the order before proceeding.




For single titles across multiple book-lists, you can employ the Order On All Lists button to avoid entering Next Order quantities line by line.  This can be well-suited to stationery orders, which are not as likely to require separate store locations (identified, when printing the GRNs, by whatever goes into Store Notes).
For single titles you can also change the supplier you wish to order from.

Users must be aware that if there is stock on hand, those quantities will be placed on hold for pre-pack and the order-quantity reduced by the same amount.  (To have the stock that are being held for pre-pack subtracted from Bookscan's calculations of stock availability you must set the appropriate formula under Utilities\System Options, on the Titles tab.)

The Report Received button gives a summary of ordering and receiving for the selection.  For a more comprehensive view into the ordering equation, open the Overs And Unders reporting window.

	Reporting Overs And Unders

.topic 1650

This window gives detailed insight into the ordering status of everything on your book-lists.  If the window opens showing no items, click the List button.

Any combination of the listed items can be selected and placed into the draft purchase orders (using the Order Selection button).

If a selected line is showing quantities in the DRAFT PrePack column then the Edit Qty in draft button will be enabled.

The list can be filtered using the radio button group, and also by the combo-box (which can limit the view to Overs-only, Unders-only or only items which have a pre-pack order already drafted).


The figure in the OnHand column will vary in accord with the in-house method of calculating available stock (see Utilities\System Options, on the Titles tab).

The Print button gives a hard-copy of the information and closes the window.

	Other Pre-Pack Reports

.topic 1660

You can close the (pre-pack) year once you have collected all monies owed by students.  The only alternative is to delete unpaid-for lines from the record of the student's order.

Selecting this option from Bookscan's main menu, you can proceed either to close all schools or to close just one.  It clears out student orders and rolls statistical data into history.

.topic 1670

This integrity check is a part of Bookscan which enables for the re-calculating and validating of different figures within the system to ensure data accuracy. There is also the option to change the 'case' of text of titles names and authors in the title master.

 Ensure that all terminals are back to the main menu.

To open the integrity check on the main menu click Utilities->Database Utilities->Integrity Check.



The options, as listed in the image above with their explanation are:

· Stock fields - The fields this includes are: Backorders, Special Orders, On approval, Conignment out, Total on Order, Consignment In, Laybys.
· Update Bookscan records
· Customer/Supplier codes - This option checks for duplicate customer/supplier codes and if there are any the process temporarily stops and it displays a window where you can delete either/both or change the code of either/both.
· Delivery addresses
· Change case of master - This option allows you to change 'case' of Titles and/or Authors so there is a consistency within the title   master.

The other options relating to changing of Title and/Or Author letter case format.
These are the fields from the Title Master and require the Change case of master option to be selected.
		The two settiings are Upper Case (all letters in captials) and Proper Case (first letter of each word is a captial letter).
	Both Author and Titles can be updated at the same time.

Step 1
It is advised that you run a re-index before running the Integrity Check.
For information on how to run a re-index, click the link.

Step 2
Select the desired options by clicking on the boxes, as Stock fields has been done in the above image.
Then click the OK button.

Step 3
Click Yes button (Having run a re-index in step 1)
If Step 1 not completed click Cancel and return to step 1.

Step 4
While running it will prompt you with the results of each option selected.
Click OK button.
If it prompts to confirm the checking of records, click Yes button.
Note: Running the integrity check can take some time depending on database size.

Step 5
When finished it will notify you that it has been completed and click OK button.

When completed it will display DONE next to the option in the list and update in blue font the date the check was last run for items.


Return To:
	Stocktake - prepare database	
	







.topic 1680

Summary of stocktake procedures
Below is a summary of the steps taken to conduct a full stocktake. You can also do stocktakes by department.

Step 1: Data error report
Check the accuracy of your prices and margins:
·	Print a Data Error report and use it to correct erroneous data in the title master.
Details....


Step 2: Prepare the stock
Prepare for an accurate stock count:
·	Check outstanding approval and consignment stock.
·	Quarantine finalised returns.
·	Quarantine unprocessed goods inwards stock
·	Ensure all stock is barcoded.
Details..

Step 3: Portable scanners
·	Prepare the portable scanners.
Details...

Step 4: Prepare the database
·	Cease all stock movement.
·	Re-index the database.
·	Print a Stock Valuation report.
·	Run a Database Integrity Check.		    			
·	Set the Bookscan to stocktake mode.
 Details....

Step 5: Count the stock
·	Counting at a terminal.    Details....
·	Counting with portable barcode scanners.  Details....
·	Downloading counts from portable scanners Details....		

Step 6: Check the accuracy of your count
·	Use the Unders and Overs reports and the Error report to identify if and where to re-count.
·	Other stocktake reports.		
Details....

Step 7: Finalise the stocktake
·	Back up the database.
·	Update the stock figures.
 Details....
	
		

.topic 1690

Cease all stock movement
It is imperative that stock not be moved during a stocktake. It leads to double counting and counting stock that has not been posted to the database. Before proceeding further ensure that all selling, moving, receiving and despatching of stock ceases.

Re-index the database
To ensure that your database is in proper condition for the stocktake, re-index it:
·	From the main menu, select Modules/ Re-index Tables.
·	In the Re-index Tables window that opens, click on the Select All button and then the Re-index button.
·	Click Close when done.

Stock valuation report
This one page report will provide a snapshot of your pre-stocktake stock holding. It gives total figures and is useful in reporting the stocktake results.
·	Open Bookscan Report.
·	Select the report Title/Valuation/All.

Database integrity check
This routine will cross-check the accuracy of certain files used in conjunction with stocktaking. In particular, it checks the approval information stored against each title.
·	From the main menu, select Modules/ Stocktake/ Integrity.
·	In the Integrity Check window that opens, ensure that the Stock Fields option is checked.
·	Click on the Start button.

Setting the system to stocktake mode
This is the last step to be taken just before the counting starts. It does two things:
·	Zeroes the Last Stocktake field on every title record.
As you count your stock, the count is added to this field.
The stocktake count remains stored here until this step is run again at the next stocktake. This is why you can print stocktake reports (except Overs and Unders) at any time until the next stocktake.
·	Sets an internal flag that indicates a stocktake is now in progress. This flag allows you access the stocktake counting screens.
From the main menu, select Modules / Stocktake. This opens the Stocktake window on the Prepare tab. Select Full Stocktake in the combo box and click on the Prepare button.




             Summary    Next step

.topic 1700

Check outstanding approvals
Stock out on approval or consignment is counted as part of your inventory and so should be reported as accurately as possible. The system will add all live approvals and consignments to your stocktake counts when finalising the stocktake. To ensure your records are accurate, print a summary report of outstanding approvals and consignments and check that your data is up to date.

From the main menu, select Sales / Approvals / Print.

For a detailed report,
·	Click on All,
·	Ensure the Include approvals that have been filled box is unchecked.
·	Click OK.

For a shorter report,
·	Click on Summary
·	Chose the Sort by Date option from the drop down list.
·	Click OK.

Review the report and delete, return or invoice approvals which are not current.
Note that deleting an approval returns the item to stock.

If you are using the consignment out module, repeat all the above for consignment stock.

Quarantine finalised returns to supplier
·	If you have damaged or faulty items waiting to be returned, or any approved returns, finalise them and despatch them to the supplier. This saves having to count them.
·	Cut off processing returns inwards at least a day ahead of the stocktake.
·	Separate finalised and unfinalised returns.
·	Finalised returns must not be included in the stocktake. If you cannot despatch them now, quarantine them so that they are not counted.
·	Returns to supplier which have not been finalised must be counted.

Quarantine unreceived stock
·	Cut off processing goods inwards at least a day ahead of the stocktake.
·	Goods received after this time must be quarantined and not counted in the stocktake.
·	You should also clear any parked receipts in the Receiving window.
·	Ensure all stock received before the cut off time is processed, put away and posted.
·	In the 'list' view of the Receiving window, check for goods that have not been posted into stock. Before the stocktake can commence, this list must be emptied. Investigate each line and either post them or delete them.

Check that all stock is barcoded
To ensure that the stock counting proceeds smoothly and that it is accurate, it is imperative that all stock is barcoded. Counting stock without barcodes is very slow and very prone to error.
Well in advance of the stocktake, check your stock. Print and attach barcode labels for any items that require them.

           Summary    Next step

.topic 1710

Metrologic Scanner Setup

Metrologic scanners can be hired from Barcode Solutions. Contact the help desk to book them.

Scanner Pre-setup Checks
Before using Metrologic scanners, you will need to ensure that you have a computer that uses Bookscan that has a USB port. This is the port/cable type that is required when using this scanner type. Without this the scanners cradle/docking  bay will not be able to talk to your system.
Ideally this should be a PC that will not be switched off during the stocktake; the server is usually the best option.

Hardware Checklist
When you receive the scanner firstly you will need to ensure that you have the following;
·	Scanner Cradle/Docking Bay
·	Data Cable (that connects to a COM/Serial port on the pc)
·	Power Cable(will have a box connected on part of the cable)
·	Scanner(s) (this will be at least one, but could be any number of scanners depending on what was hired)
·	Installation CD-ROM Disc

Hardware Setup
1.	Only one PC is required to install the scanner cradle and software for stocktaking.
2.	Turn off the PC that the cradle is going to be connected to.
3.	Connect the USB cable into the back of the cradle (the part that connects is a long rectangular shape, roughly 15mm x 3mm).
4.	Then plug the other end into the USB port of the computer.
5.	Connect the power cable into the back of the cradle. (Small,  round  plug, slightly thinner than a pen with a silver tip/end).
6.	Plug the other end into the power point.
7.	Turn on the PC (allow it to start and log in to Windows as normal). Insert the CD for Optimus SP5500.
8.	Place a scanner into the cradle (buttons facing forwards)
9.	Cradles are used for communication (sending files or receiving files between PC and Metrologic) and charging you Metrologic batteries.
10.Install cradle device driver follow the steps:
Connect Metrologic OptimusS Cradle (Model: MI5500-614) with USB cable and power cable.
Make sure the Power light is on (Red color).
Plug in USB cable into PC and you will get the screen as displayed below:


Click radio button as 'Yes, this time only'. Click 'Next'.
Click button 'Install from a list or specific location  (Advanced)'. Click 'Next'
Check the box 'Search removable media  (floppy, CD-ROM...)'. Click 'Next' button.The  system  will  then  search  for  the  CIPHERLAB  308  USB-to-RS232  Interface converter.
After Interface Converter is found, the screen will be shown as below:


Just click 'Continue Anyway'.
After finish searching USB device driver, a complete install screen will be shown.
Right click mouse on Computer icon on Desktop. Select 'Properties'->'Hardware' tab->'Device  Manager'->Ports(COM  &  LPT).  Find  out  the  com  port  for Optimus USB  to UART Bridge controller (COM9). In this example, the com port is 9. It can be other than 9.

	11. Test each of the Scanners to ensure they are working. Do this as follows;:
Turn on the power of the PDT scanner.
Hold orange button on the middle of the scanner (this will activate the scanner laser). Do not scan anything; just ensure that the light comes on.
Press '.' to select the utilities option.
Key '1' for Browse Data, press Enter.
'No Data' message is displayed for a while.
Press 'ESC' to enter 'Stock Take Menu'.
Turn off the power of the PDT scanner.
Place the scanner back in the cradle and try the next.

Software Setup
1.	Once you have finished the previous section, and the cradle has been connected and the scanners appear to be working, we can now set up the software.
2.	Create a new folder in the Bookscan data directory on your local PC called 'StockTake'.E.g. C:\e-BilityData\Stocktake.
3.	Insert the CD-ROM Disc that was enclosed with the Scanner.
4.	View the contents of the CD through My Computer.
5.	There should be three things on the CD:
Help documents,
StkUtil.exe,
Setup.exe and installation files.
6.	Copy StkUtil.exe to C:\StockTake.
(Do this by clicking mouse to highlight this file, then right clicking on one of the file and select 'Copy' on the CD. Then in the target location, using the right mouse, select 'Paste').
7.	Use the mouse to highlight C:\e-BilityData\StockTake\StkUtil.exe and right click the mouse. Click [Send To] an then click [Desktop (create shortcut)]. An icon shortcut called StkUtil.exe - Shortcut will be created. Rename it to StockTake.
8.	You can run the program by double clicking on Stocktake icon. When this is done a window as shown below is opned. This window is used to upload your scanner stock counts to a csv file in your Stocktake folder.




           Summary    Next step


.topic 1711
Counting stock can be done using portable barcode scanners or at a PC running Bookscan.

Counting the stock at a terminal
Stock counting is done in the Count Stock tab opened from the main menu: Modules/ Stocktake/ Stocktake.




Select the Default Department from the drop down box (say STK Stocktake). Products without departments are allocated to this department. After the stocktake you can print a listing of these titles and correct them.

Click on the [F5] toggle button to switch between  SINGLES, entering one copy and QUANTITIES, entering multiple copies.
·	For single copy scans, every time a barcode is scanned the count is incremented by one. No need to key a quantity - scan the barcode and it's counted.
·	For entering multiple copies, scan the barcode. The barcode will be displayed and the cursor will move to the Quantity text box. Overtype the quantity and press the Enter key.

Correcting Errors
If you have entered an incorrect quantity, used a wrong ISBN or counted something twice, you can reverse the entry by entering a negative quantity:
·	Ensure that you are in multiple copy mode.
·	Scan the barcode of the item you wish to correct.
·	Type in a negative Quantity (eg -6) and press the Enter key.
 Note that the minus sign will not appear until after you type the first digit.

Stocktake Entry browser
The browser shows the titles already counted this session. The quantity fields are:
·	Progress	Cumulative total counted so far for this title.
·	On Hand	Quantity showing as currently in stock.
·	Qty		Number added to the count at that time.

Note: You can enter and exit the system as often as you like during a stocktake. The stocktake begins when you do a Prepare and ends when you've done a Finalise.  The count is stored in the Title Master not in the stocktake window.
However when re-opening the Stocktake Entry window, previous processing will not be displayed. So ensure you know what you last counted before losing the window.  The window can be closed, Bookscan & all PCs shut down.  When they are turned on again, the stocktake will continure from where you left off.

         Summary    Next step

.topic 1712
Note: Documentation will be supplied on disc with the scanners, please refer to that for the most relevent instructions for the scanners supplied.  There are different scanners available and they will come with drivers and instructions specific  to them.

When using portable scanners to count stock, you should try to do one section or gondola at a time. After counting a section, upload the file from the scanner and load it in to Bookscan. After uploading the scanner is automatically refreshed and is ready for counting the next section. This way, if an error is made or there is equipment failure, it will be easier to correct.


Counting stock using Metrologic scanners
1. Retrieve a scanner from the cradle. When you pick it up, the screen should turn on. If it doesn't, press the ESC button. The Stocktake menu of the scanner will display.
2. We need to ensure that the scanner's memory is empty before using it for the first time. To do this, press '.'  to enter 'Utilities Menu'. Then press '1' to enter 'Browse Data Menu'.  If  'No Data' is displayed, the scanner memory is empty.
3. Go back on the main menu and press 'ESC' to start the stocktake for this scanner.
4. Begin scanning products. To scan, squeeze the large buttons on the side of the scanner (the laser beam will come on).
Note:  If  there  is  a  quantity  to  be  scanned,  pressing  '-'  to  get  in 'Manual  Mode',  then  scan  the  barcode,  and  then on  the  scanner keypad key the quantity of the total item include the existing one. For example, your current quantity is 10, if you want to add another 4, you should  enter  14.  Press  Enter  key.  This  will  show  a  quantity  on  the screen against the products ISBN. The mode will then be changed back to 'Automatic Mode', which is increased by  1 for every scan. You can continue scanning the next item.
5.	Continue scanning all items.

Uploading you counts from Metrologic scanners
1.	When  yopu have finished scanning,  press '.' key on the scanner keypad. This will enter 'Utilities Menu' of the scanner. Pressing 3 to select  'Upload Data', and then press 'ENTER'. You will see a message 'UConnecting.'.
2.	Place the scanner back in the cradle.
3.	Return to the PC that the cradle is plugged into.
4.	Click on the Stocktake icon on your desktop to open the StkUtil program. The following window will now appear:


5. Set the 'Load Mode' to 'Upload data'.
6. Click 'Start' button.
7. A pop up window will open where you can enter a filename of your own choosing, for example Lookup08060301.CSV into your selected folder (e.g. C:\e-BilityData\Stopcktake).
8.	The data will start transmitting from the scanner to the cradle. The scanner will beep once when it has finished sending. On the screen of the scanner, it will indicate the number it items uploaded.
9. At this point you will know that the data has been received correctly. The data is automatically erased after a successful upload and the scanner is now ready for further counting.

Loading your stock counts into Bookscan

1.	From the main menu, select Modules/Stocktake/Stocktake. This opens the Stocktake Entry window.
2.	Select the Default Department from the drop down box (say STK Stocktake). Products without departments are allocated to this department. After the stocktake you can print a listing of these titles and correct them.
3.	Set File Fields to '2'
4.	Click Import from File button.
5.	In the pop up window that now displays, select the file saved in the folder C:\e-BilityData\Stocktake. The file name should be in the format:
6.	'Stocktake_todaysdate' or 'Stocktake_bayNumber'
Note: Please ensure you do not import a file for the second time; otherwise it will double up your figures for these titles.
7.	Click the Open button.
8.	A pop up window will display 'Import Complete' and display the total number of titles appended and the number of titles not found in the master file.
9.	A listing of these titles will be displayed when you click OK button. This list can be printed.
Note:  To print the report at a later time, right click in the Stocktake Entry window and select 'Reprint Exception report' from the drop down menu. Then select the DBF file in the window (which will have the same name as the file that was imported with unknown titles).
10.The titles that were appended should now be added to the active Stocktake window for you to view.
11.You are now ready to upload the next file.


         Summary      Next step


.topic 1713
Note: Documentation will be supplied on disc with the scanners, please refer to that for the most relevent instructions for the scanners supplied.  There are different scanners available and they will come with drivers and instructions specific  to them.

1.	From the main menu, select Modules/Stocktake/Stocktake. This opens the Stocktake Entry window.
2.	Select the Default Department from the drop down box (say STK Stocktake). Products without departments are allocated to this department. After the stocktake you can print a listing of these titles and correct them.
3.	Set File Fields to '2'
4.	Click Import from File button.
5.	With the window that appears, select the file saved in the folder C:\Stocktake. The file name should be in the format:
6.	'Stocktake_todaysdate' or 'Stocktake_bayNumber'
Note: Please ensure you do not import a file for the second time; otherwise it will double up your figures for these titles.
Click Open button.
7.	A pop up will will display 'Import  Complete' and display the total number of titles appended and the number of  titles  not  found  in  the master file.
8.	A listing of these titles will be displayed when you click OK button. This list can be printed.
Note:  To print the report at a later time, right click in the Stocktake Entry window and select 'Reprint Exception report' from the drop down menu. Then select the DBF file in the window (which will have the same name as the file that was imported with unknown titles).
9.	The titles that were appended should now be added to the active Stocktake window for you to view.
10.You can either download the next file or move on to the next section.


         Summary       Next step

.topic 1720

Step 1 Data error report
The data error report is used for checking prices and margins. Correct pricing is necessary if you are to report accurate stock valuations. The report will list all titles with pricing and quantities outside the parameters you set; it will flush out errors such as scanning a barcode into a price field or setting a zero cost price.

Run this report well in advance of the stocktake, particularly if you are not in the habit of doing regular valuation checks. There may be many corrections you have to make.

From the main menu, select Reports to open Bookscan Reports where you select the report: Title/ Valuation/ Data Errors.

Set the parameters for your report:
·	Cost price less than
What is the lowest realistic cost price for most of your stock? If you wouldn't normally have anything less than $2.00, set the parameter at say $1.00. This will find anything with a zero cost price. Alternatively you may wish to set it to one cent to pick up zero cost prices.
·	Sell price greater than
If you wouldn't normally sell anything more expensive than say $120.00, but have a few items worth around $230, set this parameter at say $150. You can ignore the (correctly priced) high-priced items on the list and catch those wrongly priced.
·	On hand greater than
Use a quantity set just above your normal largest quantity. If you normally don't have more than 20 of something, set the parameter at 25. You might have 800 bookmarks but you can ignore them on the printout but catch a quantity set at say 97897.
·	Margin less than and Margin greater than
Again set the parameters wide of your normal margins. If you think you don't make less than 25% on anything and no more than 50%, then set these at say 15% and 70%.

Click the OK button to run the report. Review the report and correct any errors in the title master.


	   Summary    Next step

.topic 1730

Once you are satisfied with your count you are ready to complete the stocktake.

Backup your system
First, back up the database. This is essential to guard against catastrophic equipment failure.
From the main menu, click on Utilities/Database Utilities/Backup Data Files.
·	This will open the backup window.
·	The backup will be saved to the data directory. The previous backup will be overwritten. To save to another drive select the drive from the combo box.
·	Click on the Backup button.
·	All your data files and your reports will be zipped up and saved as the file ebbackup.zip. This may take some time depending on the size of your database.
·	Click on Exit when done.

Finalise the stocktake
Open the Stocktake Finalising window from the main menu: Modules/ Stocktake/ Finalise.
In the window that opens, click the OK button.
The system will open the master file and overwrite the stock on hand figures with the stock count figures.
The stocktake is now completed. You can now resume your normal activities.

               Return to the Summary

.topic 2460

The ticketing module allows you to sell and print tickets for movies, shows, events and conference rooms through the Bookscan POS. You can have multiple price points (say adult, child, concession or A, A reserve, stalls), set the number of seats for the room or theatre, take reservations and sell movie vouchers of a set number of tickets. In Ticketing Maintenance you can set up schedules of shows or movies, etc in different venues and with different price points.

Say you are showing a movie for two weeks in your theatre #2 with 200 seats, one show a day and an extra matinee on Sundays, but you are closed Monday and Tuesday. The ticketing module has wizards to help you quickly set up this schedule.

Ticketing is licensed functionality. Contact Barcode Solutions to purchase a license.

Setting up
First you will need to set up some default settings. Open the Ticketing Defaults window from the main menu: Modules/ Tickets/ Ticket Defaults:


Here you can set up your locations (theatres, conference rooms etc), default prices, show ratings and default session times, and set the days you are usually open.

Locations
Here you can set up your theatres or conference rooms, and you can allocate the number of seats for each venue.
Click the Add Location button:



Enter a Room/venue name (e.g. Theatre 2). Enter the seating/capacity (e.g. 200).
Click the Save button.
To edit or delete a room, double click on it in the browser.

Ticket prices
You can set your default prices here, though you set different prices for each show as you set up your schedule if you wish.
To add a default price, click the Add Prices button.
Enter the Price description (e.g. Adult) and the price (e.g. 25.00).
Click the Save button.
Don't set up price points for vouchers and complimentary tickets. These are built into the program.
To edit or delete a price point, double click on it in the browser

Show ratings
You can set show ratings against movie (say, G, PG, M, MA,R and X). A ratings can be set against each show and will print on the ticket.
To add a rating, click on the Add rating button.
Enter the Rating code (e.g. PG) and a description (e.g. Parental Guidance).
Click Save button
To edit or delete a rating, double click on it in the browser

Session times
You can set your default session times here. Later you can allocate different session to different shows as you set them up.
To add a session, click on the Add Session button.
Enter a session name (e.g. Matinee) and select a session time (e.g. 13:00:00).
If session times don't really apply to your situation, or the times vary considerably, just create a single session. When creating a show, you can use this session and just change the time).

Days Open
Say you are showing a movie for two weeks, one show a day and an extra matinee on Sundays, but you are closed Monday and Tuesday. When you are creating the schedule, the program will create a session for each show against which you can sell tickets. So the program needs to know which days you are open.



To set the days you are opened or closed, double click on the day in one browser to move it to the other.

Default quantity
This is a default ticket quantity for each purchase made through the POS. Set it to either 1 or 2.

Ticket message
You can have a message print on your tickets. These can be set individually for each show or movie and are usually used to promote a future show or movie. You can set the default message here.

When you have set up your defaults, click Exit button; any changes you have made will be saved when exiting.


Ticketing Hardware Setup

The ticketing module is set up to use the Star TSP847c Thermal TSP 800 series printers. Contact Barcode Solutions about using other printers for your tickets.

To setup the printer for ticket printer, install the printer in MS Windows as a normal. Set the printer name, say 'Ticket'. You can install the Star TSP847c printer's drivers that come with the printer, but it can also be installed as a generic text windows printer.

Now set the printer up in Bookscan. Open System Options and select the System Tab. Click the Other Print Settings button.  Enter the printer name ('Ticket' in the above example), into the Ticket Printer field. Click the OK button to save.


.topic 2670
Overview
For each movie, show or event (let's call them all 'shows' from now on), you will need to set up a product in the master file. Sales for every session of this show are recorded against this product code. So your ticket sales will be included in your standard Bookscan sales. As well you will be able to print reports showing how well your shows have succeeded.
For each show will you need to set a venue, set up a series of sessions and set the price points. This is done in the Ticket Maintenance windows where there are wizards to speed this up.
Then you are ready to start selling your tickets through the POS.

Departments and suppliers
Before creating tickets for the first time, you may wish to create an Bookscan department for shows. In the examples that follow, we will use a department called Tickets with a code TIX. You should also create a binding type (e.g. binding code 'MO', name 'Movies') for your show.

Bookscan requires that you set a supplier against each product. You will need to set up in the supplier master either a dummy supplier for your shows or, for movies, set up your distributor as a supplier.

Creating a show in the master file
For each show, you will need to set up a product in the master file. Open the Title Master window and click on the New F11 button as you normally would to set up any product.



You will need to set the following fields:
·	Product code
·	Title. You may also want to enter the director or principal star as the author
·	Product type as 'Ticket'.
·	Binding
·	Status
·	Department (as 'TIX' in our example).
·	Supplier

Set these flags to true:
·	Firm sale (so the program doesn't generate returns to supplier).
·	No discount
·	No special orders
·	Generic (turns off standard stock controlling – the ticketing module will control the number of tickets you can sell for each session).

Setting up your show sessions
Setting up your schedule of shows is done in the Ticketed Shows window which is opened from the main menu: Modules/ Tickets/ Ticket Maintenance. The window will show all your current shows in the browser on the left. Current shows are those for which you are now selling tickets. For the show selected in the browser, the schedule, prices and its other settings are displayed.



To add a show to the schedule, click on the Add Show (F12) button. The Title Master and Title Find windows will open. Find the show you want and press the Select button in the Title Master window to add it to the Ticketed Shows browser

For each show, you can add or edit a message to display in the tickets, set an audience rating and set the 'no printing' flag if you don't want tickets to print as they are sold at the POS.

To display both current and non-current shows, untick the 'Show only current' checkbox. The browser will display all shows and will add a third column: 'Cur'. Current shows will show a tick in the column. To toggle the currency of the show, double click the Cur column. Non-current shows will to be available for sale in the POS.

You can change the display order of the shows by using the Up (F3) and Down (F4) buttons. Moving your next-to-go show to the top of the list will cause it to be selected as the default in the POS.

Price Types
As you add each show to the browser, it will be allocated the default price points.

To add a new price point, click the Add Price (F11) button.

To edit a price point, double click on it. The Ticket Price window will open:



Overtype any field you want and click the Save (F12) button.
The Short Text and Text fields are what will print on the stub and long side of the ticket respectively.

You can change the display order of the price points by using the Up (F5) and Down (F6) buttons. Moving your most frequently sold price point to the top will cause it to be selected as the default in the POS.

Creating a Show Schedule
To create individual sessions for the ticket, click on the Build Schedule (F8) button. This will open the Ticketed Shows Schedule Creation window:



In this window you will create a session for performance of your show.
·	Set the first and last dates of your schedule.
·	Set the days there will be performances:
o	Every day: set this check if there are performances every day in you date range.
o	Single day: set this if there are just performances on one day. (This is provided as a short cut).
o	Set the recurring days: you may have performances say, every Wednesday to Friday over your date range.
o	Extra dates: click the Add Date (F7) button to add odd extra dates not within the date range or not on a selected recurring day.
o	Excluded date: click the Add Date (F8) button to exclude a date in the range. For example, you may have performances every Thursday of the year except Christmas Day.
·	Next add a session or sessions to the Default Sessions browser. Click the Add Session (F7) button to open the Ticket Session window:


o	Select a session from the Session Name combo box and a location from the Location combo.
o	You can alter the start time and the number of available seats.
o	Click Save (F12) to add the session. In our example above we will have two sessions a day
·	Now click the Build Schedule (F12) button to add each session to the Schedule browser. Repeat these steps for as many sessions and dates as required to build your schedule. If you get it wrong and want to start again, tick the Overwrite check box before clicking the Build Schedule (F12) button.

Example
An example may be useful here:
Say you want to schedule the play Wind in the Willows through January. There will be matinees on Wednesdays and Fridays in Theatre #1 and evening performances on Thursdays in Theatre #2.
·	Select 'Wind in the Willows' in the browser of the Ticketed Shows window
·	Click on the Build Schedule (F8) button to open the Ticketed Shows Schedule Creation window.
·	Set the Date range:  the First Day field to '1/01/2009' and the Last Day field '31/1/ 2009'.
·	In the Recurring Days field select Wednesday and Friday.
·	Click on the Add Session (F7) button. Select the session 'Matinee' and the location 'Theatre #1'. Save the session.



·	Click the Build Schedule (F12) button. The browser will load with matinee sessions in Theatre #1 for each Wednesday and Friday in January. The Default Sessions browser will clear.



·	Now change the Recurring days to Thursday and set the default session to 'Evening' in Theatre #2.
·	Click the Build Schedule (F12) button. The program will add to the schedule evening sessions in Theatre #2 for each Thursday in January.
·	Close the Schedule Creation window and you are finished.








.topic 2490

When the ticket module is enabled, a Ticket button will be displayed in the POS window.



Click on the Ticket button to open the Ticket sales window:


The browser on the left shows all the current shows.
The sessions and ticket prices are shown for show selected in the browser.
Note that the price points 'comps' and 'vouchers' are added by the program.

To sell some tickets:
Select the show.
Select the session,
Overtype the ticket quantities as required.
Click the Save (F12) button.
In the diagram above we are selling two adult and two child tickets to the matinee session of Wind in the Willows.

The sale line will be added to the browser of the POS.
Add any other sales (say from the candy bar).



Then just process it as a standard POS sale - click the Finalise (F12) button to open the Tendering window where you can accept your cash or process an EFTPOS payment. As the sale is completed a sales docket will print on the docket printer and the tickets on the ticket printer.

Options
Barcodes
Instead of using the Ticket button, you can enter the barcode of the show in the Barcode field. The Ticket Sales window will open with the show you scanned already selected. You may find it useful to print barcodes for each of your current shows and stick on a sheet of paper at each POS. Operator can then just can the required show instead of selecting it from the list.

Movie vouchers
You can set up movie vouchers in the Title Master window in a similar way to Bookscan tracked vouchers. The vouchers are good for a set number of shows. Customers can then use these to purchase tickets with the program keeping track of the number of shows left on the voucher.
In the Title master window, create your voucher product. Vouchers should have a barcode for the product and each voucher book should a voucher number unique to the product code. For example you have had printed a set of 1000 ten-ticket vouchers with a barcode of '46466565464' and numbered 1 to 1000. In the New Title window, set the:
·	Product Code field to '46466565464'.
·	Title to say, 'Movie voucher – 10 shows'
·	Product Type field to 'Ticket voucher'.
·	Ticket Voucher: Shows field (on the Extra fields tab) to 10.
·	Sell price.
You can set up as many movie voucher types as you like (e.g. 20-ticket voucher etc). To sell your books of vouchers, scan the barcode in the POS window. In the pop window enter the voucher number and proceed with the sale as usual.
When customers use their vouchers when purchasing tickets through the POS, select the 'Vouchers' price point. A pop up window will be displayed where you can enter the voucher number.

Reservations
If the customer has made a reservation for his tickets, process the sale as usual except that in the Ticket Sales window you should tick the Reserved Seats (F11) check box. When you click the Save (F12) button the Reservation window will open. Select the reservation and proceed as normal. This will cause the reservation to be cleared.



Note that the program will prevent you from selling more seats than are available in the selected theatre for that show. So it is important for popular shows to clear each reservation as the tickets are picked up.


.topic 2480

You can take customer reservations over the phone. Open the Ticket Reservations window from the main menu: Modules/ Tickets/ Reservations:



The Shows browser will display the current shows. The sessions for the currently selected show will display in the Sessions browser. The reservations for this session will appear the browser below.
Select the show and the session, and click the Add Reservation button to open the Edit Reservation window.
·	You can type in the customer's first and last names, their phone number and the number of seats reserved.
·	If the customer is already in your customer master, you can enter their customer key and the name and phone fields will be copied out of the customer master.
You will not be able to reserve (or sell) more seats than are available in the theatre for that show.


.topic 2060
 The marketing module is licensed functionality. Contact Barcode Solutions to purchase a license.

The marketing option allows you to:
·	record the location your customers are from (usually by postcode, state or other grouping), and
·	record your sales against your promotional materials (the 'source').
These are the standard customer breakdowns that people use but you can set any parameters you want.
At point of sale and in the order entry window, as an operator is finalising a sale, the Marketing window is displayed. Operators enter the Location or Source for the sale.
You can then print sales reports to monitor the effectiveness of your promotional campaigns and to see who you are selling to.



Setting up marketing

System options
In the Modules window of System Options you can set your marketing defaults:
You can choose to record sales by location or source or both. You can disable one or the other by using the respective Disable checkbox.
Once you have set up your locations and sources you can, you can set defaults in the Defaults combo boxes.
You can also choose where to force operators to make a selection and you can allow multiple selections per sale.

Setting up the sources
The sources are set up in the Marketing Source Codes window. This window is opened from the main menu: Tables/ Authority Tables/ Marketing/ Sources.



Add a source
·	Click on the Add button.
·	Type in the Code (maximum 6 characters)
·	Type in the Name (maximum 35 characters)
·	Click the OK button.
The source will be saved and displayed in the list.

Global change
You can absorb one source into another, deleting the original code.
·	Click on a source in the list.
·	Click the Global button.
·	Type the new source into the 'Into Source Code' field.
·	Click OK button.
·	The old source code will be deleted.

Setting up the locations
The sources are set up in the Marketing Source Codes window. This window is opened from the main menu: Tables/ Authority Tables/ Marketing/ Locations.



To set up the sources on the main menu click Tables, then move the mouse on Authority Tables, then Marketing, then click on Locations.

Add a location
·	Click on the Add button.
·	Type in the Code (maximum 6 characters)
·	Type in the Name (maximum 35 characters)
·	Click the OK button.
The location will be saved and displayed in the list.

Global change
You can absorb one location into another, deleting the original code.
·	Click on a location in the list.
·	Click the Global button.
·	Type the new location into the 'Into Llocation Code' field.
·	Click OK button.
·	The old location code will be deleted.

Using the Marketing module
Now in cash sales, laybys and invoicing, the operator will be able to select a Location and Source which will be recorded against the sale.
As the operator is finalising the sale, the Marketing pop-up window will be displayed:



What needs to be entered into the window will depend on you System Options settings. Assuming both locations and sources are enabled and there are no defaults:
·	Select a Location by either typing in some of the Code to find the one you wish and double click on it, type in the entire code.
·	Select a Source by either typing in some of the Code to find the one you wish and double click on it, type in the entire code.
·	Click Select (F12) button. The Marketing window will be closed and the sale proceed as usual.

Notes
·	If you have disabled using either Source or Location in the System options, you will not be able to enter that field in the above window.
·	If you have set a default for one or both options, you can simply click Select (F12) button to proceed. If you wish the defaults can be overtyping or overwritten by double clicking on a different option in the browser. Setting a default will mean fewer key strokes.
·	If you have set the 'multiple types per sale' flag in System Options, the marketing window will appear as each line of the sale is saved. This option is for specialized sites – it would not suit a standard retail store.

Reports
You can create reports to view performance by each of your marketing groups. Open the Marketing Report Parameters window in either Bookscan Reports or at Sales/Reports/Marketing.:



Parameters:
All items/ summary: display all sales or just total sales per marketing group
Date range: select the start and end date of your sales period.
Customer sales: setting this flag will report sales from the saleline.dbf file, otherwise the report is based on the sales history file.
Type: choose whether to report on your sales or your locations.


.topic 1740
 As Bookscan was originally written for the book and music industries, the inventory list is generally referred to as the title master. It is, however, quite adaptable for other industries.

Viewing products
Products are stored in the master table with extra publishing information stored in the publisher table. They can be viewed in the Title Master window which can be opened in many places throughout the program:
·	From the main menu: select Tables / Title Master.
·	By using the 'house' icon on the toolbar:

·	By using the F2 button in most windows in the program.



The Title Master window has 16 tabs displaying different information about your products:


Main tabs
·	Details - this tab contains most of the fields from the master file.
·	Extra fields - less important fields from the master file.
·	List - the list tab is a browser displaying all the titles in the master file.

Sales tabs
·	Specials - lists all current special orders for the selected title.
·	History - displays the monthly and weekly sales summaries.
·	All Sales - shows a detailed listing of sales of the selected title.
·	Approvals - shows all outstanding approvals for the selected title.
·	Consignment out - shows all customers to whom you have consigned the selected title.
·	Laybys - displays a list of customers who have laybys (retail configuration only).
·	Backorders - displays a list of customers who have the title on backorder (distributor/ publisher configuration only).
·	Promotions - shows a summary of all promotions that include the title.

Stock Control tabs
·	Stocks - shows a stock summary for each of your stores.
·	Movements - shows a detailed listing of the title's stock movements: goods inwards, returns to supplier etc.
·	Purchase Orders - shows a detailed listing of all purchase orders for the title.
·	Kits - displays the kits of which the title is a component. For kits themselves, it shows the kit's components.
·	Returns authorisations - displays a list of customers who have the outstanding return authorisations for the selected title (distributor/ publisher configuration only).

Specialist tabs
·	Courses - this view displays a summary of course adoptions for the title (Academic module only).

Displaying tabs
To open a tab (or close an open tab), use the right mouse to open the context menu and then select the required tab. Alternatively, use the shortcut keys listed at the bottom of the window. E.g. Alt F3 (i.e. hold the Alt button down and press the F3 function key) will open (or close) the Specials tab.



On each computer, you can save which tabs you want to open by default. With the window displaying only the tabs you want, and with the tab you want displayed first showing uppermost, use the right mouse to open the context menu and then select 'Save as default view'.

Important  note: in previous versions, to speed up the opening of the title master, users were advised to only have a few tabs open by default. This is no longer necessary. When preparing your default setting, open all tabs that you use, just de-selecting those tabs that are not relevant to you. Then save your default setting.

	
	Add a Title
	Search for Titles
	Delete a Title


Title Master Tabs/Screens:
The Title Master is split into different tabs or screens which display information about the title such as title, author and pricing information.
For more information on what are the tabs, what is contained on them and how to show different views click the link.




.topic 2700
Details tab
This tab contains most of the fields from the master file.
Buttons
·	On hand - click on this button to make a stock adjustment. A pop up window will appear where you have to type a password set in System Options, then another pop up window appears where you can make the adjustment.



·	Specials – opens and displays the Special Orders tab.
·	Laybys – opens and displays the Laybys tab.
·	Consignments out – opens and displays the Consignment out tab.
·	Approvals – opens and displays the Approvals tab.
·	Backorders – opens and displays the Backorders tab.
·	Holds – opens the Held stock pop up window.



·	Min stock – opens a pop up window where you can change the minimum stock figure. Note that the new figure defaults to zero.
·	Max stock – opens a pop up window where you can change the maximum stock figure. Note that the new figure defaults to zero.
·	Pricing matrix – opens the pricing matrix for the selected title
·	Abstract – the abstract is a comment field of any length. Click on the Abstract button to open the abstract in a larger, pop-up window either to edit it or view if there is more than will fit in the basic screen.
·	Hide/Show prices – hides/shows all but the Sell Price field. Use this feature where customers may be able to see the screen.
·	Web (F9) – click on this button to update the selected title from a either the Title Page, Nielsen Bookdata or Global BIP web sites, if you have saved the log in details in the System Options.



Category (F6) - clicking the F6 button will open a Categories pop-up window where you can add the title to or remove it from a category



BIC subject (F7) – clicking the F7 button will open a pop-up window allowing you to absorb all the titles with one BIC code into another



Flags
·	Firm Sale - check this box where the supplier will not accept returns.
·	No Discount – when this flag is set the POS and invoicing windows will not allow a discount or change of price on the title. If a header discount is placed on a sale, it will not apply to this product.
·	No Reward - stops customer rewards being given for the title.
·	No Sp Orders - prevents special orders being placed for the title.
·	Generic - the generic flag is used for products which are not stock controlled. E.g. if you are charging freight by setting up a title called "freight", you would flag it as generic. Another example would be a dump bin of an unknown number of products at various prices. In this case you would set the selling price in the master as zero and overwrite the price as you sell it through the POS.  Sets the Available quantity to 999999.
·	Tax exempt - sets the title as tax exempt.

Context menu options
·	Add to draft - this option allows you to create a draft order for the product. A pop up window will be displayed where you can enter the order quantity. Just type in this number, click the OK button and the draft order is created with the primary supplier.
·	Add to draft returns - this option allows you to create a draft return for the product.
·	Merge titles – opens a pop up window where you can merge the currently selected title with another title.
·	Marketing totals – opens a pop up window shows the sales of this product in each marketing group.

Extra fields tab
This tab contains less important fields from the master file.



The following fields may need an explanation:
Re-pricing
(Distributor/ publisher configuration only)
Where you don't know the price of a title and you wish to take backorders on it, set the Re-price flag to true. When the title is received into stock, you will set the new price. When backorders are released, the new price will be applied to the backorders (less the customer's discount).
The program will automatically remove the re-price flag during receiving unless you have also set the 'Auto lift re-pricing' flag to false. So if you are say, publishing anew title and you haven't yet set the price, tick both the 're-price' and 'auto lift re-pricing' flags to true. If you import a title and the price you set will vary with the exchange rate set the 're-price' flag to true and 'auto lift re-pricing' flags to false.

Shortage
(Distributor/ publisher configuration only)
During the picking/packing process, where insufficient stock is found to fill an order line, the program sets the product's shortage flag to true. This will cause further orders for the product to be backordered, giving you time to find the stock or reduce the on hand quantity.

Jacket path
The best way to store jackets jpg files for your titles is to name the jpg using the titles ISBN as the jpg file name e.g. 9780732271060.jpg. Store the file in a folder called 'Catalog' in your data directory e.g. C:\e-BilityDate\Catalog\9780732271060.jpg. In these instances there is no need to enter anything in the Jacket Path field and the jacket will display in this tab.
If you have stored the jacket image elsewhere or not used the ISBN as the jpg file name, you will need to enter the file path of your jacket image in the Jacket Path field.

List tab
This tab is a browser displaying all the titles in the master file.



Double click on a line in the browser to display the Details tab for that title.


.topic 1760
In all but a few instances, when you open the Title Master window, the Title Find window will open above it; so you can immediately search for the title you want. Otherwise, open the Title Find window by clicking the Find (F2) button on the Title Master window.

Select the radio button for search you wish to do.
·	Type in the search criterion in the Find field and then press the Enter key.
·	The Find window will close.
·	If only a single title matches your search, the master window will display that title.
·	For most searches, if more than one title is found, the List tab will be displayed with the products in the order of the search (e.g. after an author search, the products will be sorted by author). The selected product in the List browser will be the first product that meets your search criterion. Select the title you require either by selecting the line and pressing the Enter key or double-clicking the line with the mouse.
·	For embedded and category searches, if more than one title is found, a pop up browser window will be displayed from which you can choose the title you want.
·	For an ISBN search, if the title is not found, a pop up window will display, inviting you to search the Title Page, Nielsen BookData and Global BIP web sites to find the product.


Search methods
ISBN (F3)	
Scan or type the ISBN into the Find field. The title you require will be displayed.
If the List view is displayed, the titles will be listed in ISBN order, with the one you entered selected and centered on the screen.
If the title is not found, a pop up window will display, inviting you to search the Title Page, Nielsen BookData and Global BIP web sites to find the product.


Title (F4)
Type in the start of the title, into the Find field. For example, if you want to search for the title 'Bourne Supremacy', type 'bourne' into the Find field. The program will search for all title starting with 'bourne'.
Hints on searching by title
1.	Don't type 'a', an' or 'the' at the start of your search string.
2.	Ignore upper or lower case.
3.	Stop typing before you get to an apostrophe or other punctuation mark; it may or may not have been included during data entry. For example, if you're looking for "Russia's Youth and Its Culture", just type in 'russia' and press the Enter key.

Author (F5)	
Type the first few letters of the primary author into the Find field and press the Enter key.
If the List view is displayed, the titles will be listed in alphabetical order of author. The selected product in the List browser will be the first product that meets your search criterion.
Note that author name must be entered in the correct order: if the author appears in the title master as 'Brown, Dan' searching for 'brown' will work, but searching for 'Dan Brown' will not.

Catalogue (F6)
If you are using catalogue numbers (and this is usual for music stores), type the catalogue number of the product into the Find field. The title you require will be displayed.
If the List view is displayed, the titles will be listed in catalogue number order, with the one you entered selected and centered on the screen.

3 – 2 - 1 (F7)	
The 3 – 2 – 1 code is made up from the title field and serves as a mnemonic shortcut. The code is derived from the title: It takes the:
·	first three letters of the first word of the title,
·	first two letters of the second word and
·	first letter of the third.
So the title 'Luscher Color Test' has a 3 – 2 – 1 code of 'LUSCOT".

·	The following small words are ignored – a, an, the, of, and, to, as, on, in. For example: 'Jeeves and the Feudal Spirit' will have 3 – 2 – 1 code 'JEEFES'
·	All punctuation is ignored – only letters and numbers as used.
·	There are no spaces in the code. So 'P.G. Wodehouse: a Life' will have 3 – 2 – 1 code 'PGW'.

Type the 3 – 2 – 1 code into the Find field and press the Enter key and the requested title will be displayed. If the List view is displayed, the titles will be listed in 3 – 2 – 1 code order. The selected product in the List browser will be the first product that meets your search criterion.
Note that only part of the code need be typed; in one of the above example, searching for 'JEEF' will still find 'Jeeves and the Feudal Spirit'.

Supplier (Alt F7)	
Type the supplier code into the Find field and press the Enter key.
The titles in the List tab will be listed in of supplier code order, with the first title for the supplier selected and centered on the screen.

Imprint (F8)	
Type the imprint code into the Find field and press the Enter key.
The titles in the List tab will be listed in imprint order, with the first title with this imprint selected and centered on the screen.

Abstract (Alt F8)
In the Find field, type a search string and press the Enter key. The program will search the Abstract field for the string and will display the first title where it finds the string. Unless you can enter a search for a unique string, you may find the embedded search more useful as it will display all titles that meet the criteria

Category (F9)	
For this search the Find field is replaced by a combo box. Enter the category code in the field, or select it from the drop-down box, and press the Enter key. A pop up window will display, listing all titles in that category. Select a required title from the list.
You can also do a multi-category search. See the section below.

Web Search (F11)	
This is a powerful search enabling users to search the Title Page, Nielsen BookData and Global BIP web sites to find products. See the web search sections below.

Embedded (F2)
This is a powerful search that will look for a word or phrase in several fields of the title master. Type your search string into the Find field and press the Enter key. The program will search for any occurrence of your string in any of these fields: title, author, illustrator, abstract and comments.
If only one title meets your search criterion, that title will be displayed.
If more than one title is found, a pop up browser window will be displayed from which you can choose the title you want.

Multi-category Search (Alt + F9)
The multi-category search allows for the searching of categories using the logical operators: 'AND', 'OR' and 'AND NOT'. This allows you to narrow a search by excluding categories as well as including them.

To run the search:
·	Click the Multi Category (Alt F9) button.
·	Select the Add category drop-down field to select which category to add first category.
·	Using the Add Category drop-down list and clicking on an item, you can add it to the search which is displayed in the list box.
·	The default logical operator is 'or'; you can change it using the Logical combo box.
·	When you have entered your search, click the OK button.
·	As with the standard category search, a pop up browser window will be displayed from which you can choose the title you want.

In this example, the program will search for titles in either the Biography or Dictionaries categories that are not new releases from January.

Logical options:
·	^AND^ - 'A and B' - titles must be in both categories A and B.
·	^OR^ - 'A or B' - titles can be in either category, A or B.
·	^AND NOT^ - 'A and not B' - titles must be in category A and not in category B.

Testing the expression
If you have a complex expression, you can test that it is a valid search by clicking on Test Expression button.

Other Options
·	Delete Cat	Removes the selected category from the search.
·	Delete All	Clears all the current multi-category search criteria.
·	Sort Up	Swaps the category selected with the one above it.
·	Sort Down	Swaps the category selected with the one below it.




.topic 1750

There are several ways to load products into your title master tables:
·	Manually entering titles in the New Title window.
·	Creating second hand titles from existing titles in the Buyback window.
·	Using the Web Search feature in the Title master window to download individual titles from Title Page, or groups of titles from the Nielsen BookData and Global BIP web sites.
·	Importing titles in the Import window, from text or HTML files downloaded from the Title Page, Nielsen BookData or Global BIP web sites.
·	Importing titles, in the Import window, from Onix or Bisac files issued by publishers or distributors.

New Title window
You can open the New Title window from the Title Master window. Just click the New F11 button.


Notes on some of the fields
·	Mandatory fields are coloured red.
·	After you enter the ISBN into the New Code field, the program will check to see if the title is already in the database. If it is, it will offer to return to the Title Master window and display that title. If the title is not in the database, it will check the archive. If the title is in the archive, the program will offer to return it to the master file.
·	Clicking the Copy F3 button will allow you to copy all the details, except the ISBN, of an existing title into the New Title window's fields.
·	Clicking the Copy Last F2 button will allow you to copy all the details, except the ISBN, of the last title you used into the New Title window's fields.
·	Clicking the F6 button will open a Categories pop-up window where you can add the title to or remove it from a category. See the Details tab section above, for details.
The Next (Alt F2) button will load the next dummy product code (set on the Titles tab in System options) into the ISBN field. The program will then increment the next dummy product code.  If this code is an ISBN (i.e. 13 digits starting 978 or 979) then the last (check) digit will be calculated to make it a valid  ISBN.




.topic 2260
Deleting a title

Titles can be deleted through the Title Master individually, but with a restriction: all stock figures must be zero. This includes stock currently on hand, on order, and on consignment, minimum stock etc. (but does not include the last stocktake figure)
To delete titles:
·	Open the Title Master.
·	Search for the title you wish to delete in the search window.
·	When found, ensure the title is selected (either by having the title open in the 'Details' tab, or highlighted in the 'List' tab).
·	Click the Delete Icon (red with a white cross) on the toolbar at the top of the Bookscan window or press the F5 key.
·	You will be asked to confirm the deletion and then given an option to move the title to the archive.

Note: All quantities must be zero for the title to be deleted.









.topic 2300
Using Title Page with Bookscan
There is a service provided for Title Page subscribers that allow the use of the Title Page API, which enables a more automated way of retrieving data from their service without manually opening their website.

Title Page Limitations
There is a limited amount of information that this Title Page (API) service will search and retrieve:
·	Searching: You can only search the Title Page (API) using ISBN13. There is currently no Embedded, Title or Author type searching.
·	Data fields retrieved: Title, Author, Author Role, Supplier, Status, Price, Supplier Stock Level, Supplier Order Level, Publisher Ship Date.

Notes
·	As listed, this service does not retrieve all the data that would normally come in from an ONIX file downloaded from Title Page website. This is a limitation on Title Page's side. We are retrieving everything available.  If you wish to use Bookscan as a springboard to your website, with jacket images and the like, it would be best to use Nielsen Bookdata, ONIX files from suppliers or Title Page's website as your primary source of data, as they contains more data.
·	Title page's Supplier Order Level and Supplier Stock level fields do not get saved into Bookscan, but will be visible when using this Title Page API through Bookscan.
·	Title page's Supplier field, just as in the ONIX import window, does not automatically link with the suppliers contained in your own Supplier Master. You will need to do the linking up yourself (as will be explained below).

Setup
Before you can use the Title Page API features in Bookscan, you will first need to ensure your account with Title Page has this feature enabled. It is not enabled by default and you have to contact Title Page to enable it. We've no idea why!
Open the Titles tab of System Options and click on the Title Page Set Up button. Enter your Title Page Username and Password and save them.

Updating Existing Titles
This method of updating can be done anywhere throughout the program where you can view the Title Master. It is used to update price and availability
Open the Title Master and display the Details tab.

Click on the Web (F9) button.
The Web Search window will open.

·	Ensure that Title Page (F6) is selected and click the Login (F12) button. Bookscan will attempt to log in to the Title Page web site.
·	A normal course of it running will show these messages (in order);
§	Connecting to Title Page
§	Requesting data for: (ISBN)
§	Success!: data found for : (ISBN)
·	If you don't succeed in logging in, the window will show 'failed' and a detailed failure message will display.
·	If the log in succeeds, Bookscan will retrieve an update file for the title and the Title Page Update window will open:

·	The fields coloured blue display what is currently in your master file. The fields coloured black are from Title Page except the Set supplier field which displays your current primary supplier.
·	Clicking the Update (F12) button will cause the program to overwrite this fields that display a tick against them.
·	To stop a field from updating, click on the tick to remove it.

Title
If the checkbox beside the Title field is checked, the master file title field will be updated. Ticking the 'Upper case' checkbox will cause it to save in upper case.

Contributor:
If the checkbox beside the Author field is checked, the Author field in the Title Master will be updated. The Role field is the role the contributor plays with this product. The field next to it is the description of that role. A01 is (principal) author. If the incoming contributor role is not this, you may choose to not update the Author field.

Supplier
Title page's Supplier field can't be mapped to Bookscan's supplier master. You will need to do the linking up yourself.
The Supplier Name field shows the supplier as recorded by Title Page. The blue field below it shows the primary supplier in your master file.
The Set Supplier combo box will also default to the Bookscan supplier. It's here that you can manually set the Bookscan supplier to be the same as the Title Page supplier.

Status
The Availability field displays the ONIX status as recorded by Title Page. The blue field below it shows the status in your master file. If you have mapped your status fields to Onix fields (or if your statuses use the Onix standard), the Set Status combo box will default to the Title Page status. If you haven't done the mapping you will need to set the Status field manually.

Publisher shipping date
If the publisher/distributor is out of stock and have nominated an expected shipping date, it will be displayed in the Pub Ship Date field. This will update the corresponding field in the title master.

Pricing
The Sell Price and Retail Price fields display the Title Page (Australian) prices with the master file price in blue, beneath them. The master file prices will update when you click the Update (F12) button. If you wish, you can manually key a different Sell or Retail price in these fields, or un-tick the checkboxes to cause the prices not to update.
Note: Below the Retail field is the price type for the Title Page prices. Standardly, the prices are 'retail price including tax'. If it is something other than this, you will need to take it in consideration when updating.

Supplier Availability
This information is for information only; the data is not imported into Bookscan.
·	On hand – indicates whether the supplier has stock.
·	On order - indicates if the supplier (Yes/No) has stock on order.

Adding new titles using the Title Page API

Title Master
If an ISBN search in the Find Title window fails to find a product in the master file, the program will open the Web Search window from where you can search the TitlePage web site for the product.
·	In the Web Search ensure the Title Page radio button is selected and click the Log in (F12) button.
·	The Title Page login window will display. Bookscan will attempt to log in to the Title Page web site.
·	A normal course of it running will show these messages (in order);
§	Connecting to Title Page
§	Requesting data for: 9781841593067
§	Success!: data found for : 9781841593067
·	If you don't succeed in logging in, the window will show 'failed' and a detailed failure message will display.
·	If the log in succeeds, Bookscan will retrieve an update file for the title and the Title Page Update window will open:

Note that the window is slightly different from the update window shown earlier – the only optional import fields are the status and sell price.

Notes
·	The ISBN, Title, Author and Retail fields will always be imported to the master file.
·	Note that you can overtype these fields in the window if you wish.
·	Ticking the 'Upper case' checkbox will cause the title to save in upper case.
·	The Role field is the role the contributor plays with this product. The field next to it is the description of that role. A01, for example, is (principal) author.

Supplier
Title page's Supplier field can't be mapped to Bookscan's supplier master. You will need to do the linking up yourself. The Supplier Name field shows the supplier as recorded by Title Page. The Set Supplier combo box will be empty. It's here that you can manually set the Bookscan supplier to be the same as the Title Page supplier.

Status
·	The Availability field displays the ONIX status as recorded by Title Page.
·	If you have mapped your status fields to Onix fields (or if your statuses use the Onix standard), the Set Status combo box will default to the Title Page status.
·	If you haven't the field will be blank and you will have to set the Set Status field manually.
·	Unticking the checkbox to the right of the Set Status field, will prevent the master status from being updated.

Publisher shipping date
If the publisher/distributor is out of stock and have nominated an expected shipping date, it will be displayed in the Pub Ship Date field. This will update the corresponding field in the title master.

Pricing
The Sell Price and Retail Price fields display the Title Page (Australian) price. Unticking the checkbox to the right of the Sell Price field, will prevent the master sell price from being updated.
Note: Below the Retail field is the price type for the Title Page prices. Standardly, the prices are 'retail price including tax'. If it is something other than this, you will need to take it in consideration when updating.

Supplier Availability
This information is for information only; the data is not imported into Bookscan.
·	On hand – indicates whether the supplier has stock.
·	On order - indicates if the supplier (Yes/No) has stock on order.




.topic 2570
Adding new titles using the Nielsen BookData API

Bookscan contains a Bookfind-on-Line web search (from Nielsen BookData). This allows users to download on the fly, title details from the Bookdata's web site using a variety of search criteria: ISBN, title, author, publication dates etc.

Note: You will need a subscription to Nielsen BookData to use this service.

Setting up
System Options
To set upe-Bility to use this feature, open the Titles tab of System Options, click on the Set Up button for Nielsen Bookdata. Enter your Nielsen Bookdata login code and password.

Binding and Status mapping
Nielsen Bookdata now uses Onix codes for binding and statuses. If you haven't done so already, you will need to map your bindings and statuses to Onix. From the main, open the Bindings and Status tables: Tables/ Authority tables/ Bindings and Tables/ Authority tables/ Status.
Open the edit window on each line and select the related Onix mapping from the drop-down box. This will take about 5 minutes.

Supplier mapping
Bookdata have 6 digit supplier codes. It is an advantage to map the suppliers you use to your supplier master. This may be a large undertaking and you may want to map them as required.
The supplier mapping is done on the Supplier tab of the Supplier Master window:


Using Nielsen BookData's search engine
The search is activated:
·	Via the Title Find window for title master searches.
·	After an unsuccessful ISBN search in the Title Find window, the program will offer to do a web search to look for the title.
·	Via the Details tab of the Title master (click on the Web (F9) button).
·	Via the Receiving window – scan the barcode of a title not in the database and the program will offer to search the web site for the title.
·	Via EDI receiving – titles not in the master file display "Not in the master file" in the browser. Select one of these titles, open the context menu and select "Add ISBN" to search the web for the title.

When the search is activated, the Web Search window is displayed:

You are able to do simple searches by typing the search criterion into the relevant fields.
In the example above, the user has created a title search for 'wodehouse' and has added a further search criterion of a (local) price date range of 20.00 to 40.00. So the search will be all titles by Wodehouse priced from $20.00 and $40.00. The search has found 31 titles.

Creating your search criteria:
·	Enter the search data in the relevant fields (e.g. the title, "South Pacific").
·	Click the Search (F12) button to do your search. Bookscan will contact the BookData web site and begin loading a browser with the results of your search.
·	Title (and other text) searches are embedded. The example above will find any title with "South Pacific" anywhere in its title field.
·	Bookscan will prompt you if many titles meet your search criteria (if you get 100 hits, you may wish to backtrack and add extra criteria); otherwise it will just begin downloading. You may set your own prompt level in the window – the default is 20.

Creating complex searches:
See the section Search logic at the bottom of this page.

Search results

·	As the results are downloaded you will see them added to the results browser.
·	You can click the Cancel button, or press the Escape key, at any time to cancel the download. So you can watch for the title you require and after it appears in the browser, press the Escape key and the download will stop.
·	After downloading, if you have too many titles in the browser, you can click the Show Search (F11) button to edit the search and re-do the download.
·	In the browser, the second column, On File, shows whether you already have the title in your master file. Selecting such a title in the browser will cause the title master to display that title.
·	You can filter the results browser to just show items with local pricing by using the "Local Only (F7)" check box.
·	Set the "Keep Open (F6) checkbox to true if you want to download multiple titles, otherwise the search window will automatically close when you down load a title or group of titles.
·	Note that the search window is not modal to the Title master; so you can switch back and forth between the two windows.

Single title import
In the Results browser, highlight the title you wish to import and click the "Update Master (F12)" button. Or just double click on the title in the browser. The title will be added to the browser. You can then return to the title master window and edit the departments and other fields you want.
Alternatively you can set the program to display the Extra Fields window (see 'multiple title import' below), where you can set the Department and other fields before importing. This flag is set in the Web Search Defaults window (se below).
If the "Keep Open (F6) checkbox is ticked search window will remain open after you have added a title, allowing you add multiple titles. If it is unticked, the window will automatically close.

Multiple title import
You can import multiple titles to the master file by highlighting all the titles you wish to import and click the "Update Master (F12)" button.  The Extra Fields window will open where you can select the department, supplier and a few other details.


If you have mapped the Bookdata supplier code to your supplier, the Supplier field will display the supplier. If not you will need to select the supplier.
You can set the minimum stock add the titles to the draft..
If the Always Overwrite checkbox is ticked, then all the titles imported will have the supplier nominated in the Supplier field as their primary supplier. If it is unticked, only those import records with the same Bookdata supplier code will record this supplier; other titles will have their primary supplier left unchanged.

Setting web search defaults
The Web Search Defaults window can be opened from the Web Search window by clicking on the Set Defaults (F8) button. If you have already started your search and the search results are showing you can open the window using the context menu.

You can set the following:
·	Don't download blurbs.
Select long or short blubs.
Don't download jacket images.
·	Set the jacket size.
Set a maximum number of records to download on any search.
·	Set a default department (useful when updating by double clicking in the browser).
·	Set a MISC as the default supplier (useful when updating by double clicking in the browser).
·	Always show the fields selection ('Extra Fields') window for single title downloads.
·	If you have a TitlePage account, you can have the program go to the title page site to get the price and availability data.


SEARCH LOGIC

Wildcard Searches

Wildcard searching allows you to widen a search on a textual or name field by including a truncation symbol (* or ?) in your search term. The * symbol is used to match any number of characters and the ? symbol is used to match a single character.

Examples of truncation:

Searching for variants of words, for example BEACH* to find Beachball, Beachams, etc

Searching for words with different spellings, for example COL*R for colour and color.

Searching for titles with ISBN prefix, for example 07139*

Searching for a word where a single character may vary, for example WOM?N to find woman and women; fertili?er to find fertiliser and fertilizer.

Single Word searches

Finding single word titles can be difficult, especially if the title is also a common word.  Put the pipe symbol ( | ) round your search term and the single word will be found.

For example, |boy| will find the title "Boy" but not "101 Things for a Boy to Make".

You can also use it to find an exact match of more than one word, for example |The War of the Worlds| will return titles where the title is only The War of the Worlds and exclude titles with other words in the title.

Phrase Searches

Sometimes you'll only want results that include a phrase. In this case, simply put quotation marks around your search terms. 
For example a title search for "Nuclear fuel"  will include titles were these words adjacent to each other eg. "The International Nuclear Fuel Market" but not "Nuclear Energy and its Fuel Cycle".

To find the exact match of a phrase or word put the pipe symbol (|) around your search terms, for example
|The War of the Worlds| will return titles where the title is only The War of the Worlds and exclude titles with any other words in the title.

AND OR NOT Searches

Operators are used to link search terms or fields. Depending on the operators used and the contents of the database, the number of search hits will be broadened or narrowed.  AND OR NOT must be entered in CAPITALS.

The AND operator is used to narrow a search by including specific terms. For example, ABANDONED AND ABACUS would include all records where the search field contains both the word ABANDONED and the word ABACUS.

The OR operator is used to broaden a search by including any terms. For example, ABACUS OR ABANDONED would include all records where the search field contains either the word ABACUS or the word ABANDONED or both words.

The NOT operator is used to narrow a search by excluding specific terms. For example, ABANDONED NOT ABACUS would include all records where the search field contains the word ABANDONED but not the word ABACUS.

You cannot enter NOT as the first term in any search field.

If you enter two or more terms in a search field just separated by a space, eg FOOD BOOK, the system will treat them as though they are joined with AND operators, so will look for records which have both words in that field.  
 
Search Term Nesting

Using brackets you may nest search terms to ensure that they are evaluated in the order you require. For example the search GREEN OR RED AND BLACK will first locate the records with GREEN or RED and then select those that contain BLACK. Whereas the search GREEN OR (RED AND BLACK) locate the records that contain both RED and BLACK and also include any records containing GREEN.

You may have more than one set of brackets in a search. For example (GREEN AND BLUE) OR (RED AND BLACK) You may nest sets of brackets. For example (GREEN AND (BLUE OR RED OR BLACK)) NOT YELLOW.

Range Searches

For text strings the curly brackets are used, for example to find all Authors with names between these alphabetic ranges enter in the Author/Contributor field: {Adams TO Addler}


.topic 2640
Adding new titles using the Bowker Book in Print

Bookscan contains two Bowker Books in Print web search:
Bowker Books in print
This is the standard search engine Bowker subscribers will use. It allows users to download on the fly, title details from the Bowker's web site using a varirty of search criteria: ISBN, title, author, series and keyword with additional filters of binding, publication date, supplier, status, market and price.

Bowker web services
 his allows users to download on the fly, title details from the Bowker's web site using up to threef search criteria: ISBN, title and author.

Note: You will need a subscription to Bowker Books in Print to use these services.

Setting up
System Options
To set Bookscan up to use this feature, open the Titles tab of System Options, click on the Set Up button for Bowker BIP and enter your Bowker on line login code and password.

Binding and Status mapping
You should map your statuses and bindings to Bowker's.
From the main, open the Bindings and Status tables: Tables/ Authority tables/ Bindings and Tables/ Authority tables/ Status.
Open the edit window on each line and select the related Bowker mapping from the drop-down box. This will take about 5 minutes.

Using Bowker Books in Print
The search is activated:
·	Via the Title Find window for title master searches.
·	After an unsuccessful ISBN search in the Title Find window, the program will offer to do a web search to look for the title.
·	Via the Details tab of the Title master (click on the Web (F9) button).
·	Via the Receiving window – scan the barcode of a title not in the database and the program will offer to search the web site for the title.
·	Via EDI receiving – titles not in the master file display "Not in the master file" in the browser. Select one of these titles, open the context menu and select "Add ISBN" to search the web for the title.

When the search is activated, the Web Search window is displayed:


In the example above, the user has created a title search for 'wodehouse'. The search has found 47 titles.

Creating your search criteria:
·	Enter the search data in the relevant fields (e.g. the title, "South Pacific").
·	Click the Search (F12) button to do your search. Bookscan will contact the Bowker Books In Print web site and begin loading a browser with the results of your search.
·	Title (and other text) searches are embedded. The example above will find any title with "South Pacific" anywhere in its title field.
·	Bookscan will prompt you if many titles meet your search criteria (if you get 2000 hits, you may wish to backtrack and add extra criteria); otherwise it will just begin downloading. You may set your own prompt level in the window – the default is 20.

Search results

·	As the results are downloaded you will see them added to the results browser.
·	You can click the Cancel button, or press the Escape key, at any time to cancel the download. So you can watch for the title you require and after it appears in the browser, press the Escape key and the download will stop.
·	After downloading, if you have too many titles in the browser, you can click the Show Search (F11) button to edit the search and re-do the download.
·	In the browser, the second column, On File, shows whether you already have the title in your master file. Selecting such a title in the browser will cause the title master to display that title.
·	You can filter the results browser to just show items with local pricing by using the "Local Only (F7)" check box.
·	Set the "Keep Open (F6) checkbox to true if you want to download multiple titles, otherwise the search window will automatically close when you down load a title or group of titles.
·	Note that the search window is not modal to the Title master; so you can switch back and forth between the two windows.

Single title import
In the Results browser, highlight the title you wish to import and click the "Update Master (F12)" button. Or just double click on the title in the browser. The title will be added to the browser. You can then return to the title master window and edit the departments and other fields you want.
Alternatively you can set the program to display the Extra Fields window (see 'multiple title import' below), where you can set the Department and other fields before importing. This flag is set in the Web Search Defaults window (se below).
If the "Keep Open (F6) checkbox is ticked search window will remain open after you have added a title, allowing you add multiple titles. If it is unticked, the window will automatically close.

Multiple title import
You can import multiple titles to the master file by highlighting all the titles you wish to import and click the "Update Master (F12)" button.  The Extra Fields window will open where you can select the department, supplier and a few other details.


You can set the minimum stock add the titles to the draft..

Setting web search defaults
The Web Search Defaults window can be opened from the Web Search window by clicking on the Set Defaults (F8) button. If you have already started your search and the search results are showing you can open the window using the context menu.

You can set the following:
·	Don't download jacket images.
·	Don't download blurbs.
·	Set a default department (useful when updating by double clicking in the browser).
·	Set a MISC as the default supplier (useful when updating by double clicking in the browser).
·	Always show the fields selection ('Extra Fields') window for single title downloads.
·	If you have a TitlePage account, you can have the program go to the title page site to get the price and availability data.


.topic 1770
Customer data is stored in the customer.dbf table. Customer details can be viewed in the Customer Master window which can be opened in many places throughout the program:
·	From the main menu: select Tables/ Customer Master.
·	By using the 'person' icon on the toolbar (second from the right):



·	By using the F3 button in many windows in the program.


·	In many windows, clicking the Alt-F3 button, will load the last customer you used.

Customer Master window
The Customer Master window has 10 tabs displaying different information about your customers:



Account details tabs
·	Details - customer's key and name fields, and account flags.
·	Address – customer's addresses, phone numbers and email address.
·	Finance – for debtor customer's, the account details are displayed here.
·	Categories - shows all categories which contain this customer.
·	Abstract – a free text form where you can record your notes about the customer.
·	Contacts - shows all contacts listed for this customer.
·	List – contains a browser displaying all your customers.

Sales tabs
·	Specials - lists all current special orders for the customer.
·	Laybys - lists all current laybys for the customer.
·	Purchases - itemises all the customer's purchases.
·	Backorders - displays a list of titles the customer has on backorder (distributor/ publisher configuration only).

Displaying tabs
To open a tab (or close an open tab), use the right mouse to open the context menu and then select the required tab. Alternatively, use the shortcut keys listed at the bottom of the window. E.g. Alt F5 (i.e. hold the Alt button down and press the F5 function key) will open (or close) the Specials tab.
On each computer, you can save which tabs you want to open by default. With the window displaying only the tabs you want, and with the tab you want displayed first showing uppermost, use the right mouse to open the context menu and then select 'Save as default view'.
Note: to speed up the opening of the customer master, it is best to only have the tabs you regularly use, open by default. Note that not all these tabs will be relevant to all users.

Tabs – detailed notes

Details tab
Key
The customer key is the field used to uniquely identify a customer. Usually the key comprises the first 5 letters of the surname (or company name) and a number generated by the program e.g. KELLY006. In System Options you can vary how the key is set up.

Change key
You can change the customer key here. Just click on the Change Key button: A pop-up window will open where you can type in the new key. The program will then update the more than 40 tables contains the customer key.

Frequent shopper key
The frequent shopper key is an alternate way for the users to identify a customer. The field is 16 characters and can be used to record a barcode if you are issuing customer cards to your customers. In the Find Customer window you can select the frequent shopper search and scan the customer barcode into the search field.

Names
Individuals
With customers who are individuals as opposed to companies, you should break down the customer name into parts: surname, first name etc. The full customer name is also stored in the Name field. (The Build Name button will build customer's name from the other name fields).
While it is not necessary to break down the name in to parts, it is very advantageous to do so. It allows for searches by surname and provides greater flexibility for customer merge and export files.
If you have imported a customer table from elsewhere without this name break down, there is a grooming tool in Bookscan to help you: see 'Customer Grooming'  below.

Companies
For companies, you should enter the company name in the Surname field and the Name field. (The Build Name button will copy the surname into the Name field). Other name fields should be left blank.

Contacts
For companies, you can record your various contacts in the contacts table. The primary contact is displayed next to the Contacts F7 button. To view, add or edit contacts, click on the button. The will open the Contacts window:



Notes
·	Use the arrow buttons on the left to navigate through the various contacts.
·	Use the arrow buttons on the right to navigate through the various addresses for this customer.
·	The main contact is set using the Main Contact (F8) check box.
·	To edit a contact, just start typing. The Add button caption will change to 'Save (F3)' and the Exit button to 'Cancel (Esc)'. Use the cancel button to undo any changes.
·	To add a contact, click the Add (F3) button. The fields will clear and you can type in the contact details.

Holds
You can place a product on hold for a customer. To do this, click on the Holds (F7) button. This will open the Holds pop-up window which will display all products on hold for this customer.



Holding a product for the customer:
·	If you want to print a Holds docket, ensure the Print checkbox is ticked.
·	Set a 'hold till' date.
·	Click on the Add Hold Item button.
·	In the pop-up window that opens, scan the barcode and press the Enter key.
·	In the next pop-up window that opens, enter the quantity and press the Enter key.

Releasing a held product:
·	Select the item in the browser.
·	Click on the Release Held Item button.

Comments
You can enter a short comment about the customer that will display below the customer name in the various sales windows.
For very important comments, tick the 'Pop up comments' check box. In the POs and the Order Entry windows, a pop-up window will display, showing the comments, when the customer is selected. This will force the operator's attention.

Flags
·	Debtor – set the customer as debtor customer. After setting this flag you should enter the account details on the Finance tab.
·	Student – this is for the pre-pack schools module only.
·	Mailorder – allows the customer to be invoiced through the Order Entry window but unlike a debtor, they will need to make a payment with the order. Use this flag to set up your web customers.
·	No statement – for debtors set them to not receive a statement.
·	Special order letters – set the program to print a letter when their special order comes into stock.
·	No backorders – in the order entry window, backorders will not be created where there is insufficient stock to fill the order (distributor/ publisher configuration only).
·	On shipment labels – a special setting for Coles Myer.
·	No account export – prevents the customer, and their transactions, from exporting to MYOB.

Optional groupings
·	Area – used to group debtor customers in the "all transactions" report.
·	Customer type – when using the pricing matrix, the settings allocated the customer to a discount group for each product. So product 9785464644644 may have a 47.5% discount for customer of type 'B' (distributor/ publisher configuration only).
·	Sales reps – the sales rep 2 field is used if you have a mixed book and music company where you have separate sales reps for books and music.
·	Commission rate – you can set your commissions for your sales reps by customer. Enter the percentage amount in the Commission Rate field.

Address tab
The customer master allows for a single postal address and multiple delivery addresses. To add extra delivery addresses click on the Alternate Addresses (F7) button.



You can print a customer label by clicking one on the Print Label buttons.

Finance tab
The Finance tab displays account details for customer who are debtors:



·	Bill to – if the customer is a branch or division of a company, you can have their invoices billed to a central customer key. Enter that key in the Bill to field.
·	Invoice sort order – some customers want to specify the sort order of their invoices. The choices are ISBN, title, author and natural (or 'as entered').
·	EDI - if the customer is using Pacstream, you can send electronic invoices to them. Tick the EDI checkbox and enter their Pacstream number in the text field.
·	Supplier number – if the customer has allocated you a supplier number you can enter it here. It will be quoted on their invoices.
·	Terms – set your terms of trade for this customer here.
·	Credit limit – for retail users the program will warn operators when the credit limit is being exceeded. In the distributor/ publisher configuration, customer over the credit limit will have their orders backordered.
·	Stop – setting a customer on stop will prevent their orders being processed in the Order Entry window.
·	No reward – customer is not eligible for any rewards schemes.
·	No auto allocation of credits – when crediting customers by appending either accredit note or a returns authorisation in to the Order Entry window, the credit will automatically allocate against the original invoice. To turn off this feature, tick the No Allocation checkbox.
·	Open item – when this flagged is ticked, the customer is set as an open-item debtor. When unticked, they are 'balance brought forward' debtors. The open-item setting is recommended. Here payments and credits are allocated are invoices making it easier to track accounts and settle account disputes.
·	Standard discount – the two Standard Discount fields are default settings for the pricing matrix.

Categories tab
Customers can be allocated to categories for variety of purposes. If, in System Options, you set the program to track categories of purchases, then as customer purchase products they are allocated to the categories that product is in. For example, if the title 'Julius Caesar' is in categories 'biography' and 'history', a customer buying that title will also be allocated to those two categories. You can then use these customer category lists to create accurately targeted marketing campaigns. To continue the example, if you had an electronic brochure on biographies, you could load all customers from the biography category into the Mail Out window and have the program email the brochure to them.
You could also create a mailing list manually. You could create a category called say, Newsletter and add you newsletter customers to the category. Each month you could use the Mail Out to create mailing labels for these customers.
You can manually add or remove customers from a category in the Categories tab.


Associated pages:
	Add a customer
	Search for customers
	Customer grooming
	


.topic 1780
 To add a customer to the customer master, click on the New (F11) button on the Customer Master window. The New Customer window will open:



The fields are similar to the fields in the Customer master window. Some fields that may need more information:
·	Customer key field - enter the first five letters of the surname or company name. (Your Systems Option setting may allow more). The program will allocate a number to make the key unique.
·	Full name field - as enter the first name and surname, the name field will be built. For companies, enter the company name in the Surname field and leave the other name fields blank.
·	Finance (F4) button – for debtor customers, click on the Finance (F4) field to display more fields.


Return to:
	Customer Summary.
	

.topic 1800

In many instances, when you open the Customer Master window, the Find Customer window will open above it; so you can immediately search for the customer you want. Otherwise, open the Find Customer window by clicking the Find (F2) button on the Customer Master window.



The search allows for five types of searches:
·	Surname - search by the customer surname.	
·	Full name – search by the customer name. This is useful for searching for company names.
If more than one customer fits the surname or name search criterion, the List view of customers will open in alphabetical order from the name you requested. Scroll down the list and click on the one you require. Then click the Detail tab or just double click the customer.
If the customer has been is identified uniquely, then the Detail view for the customer will open.
·	Customer Code - type in all or part of the customer key.
·	Frequent Shopper key	- scan in the barcode on the customer card.
·	Embedded - This is a powerful search that will look for a word or phrase in several fields of the customer master. Type your search string into the Find field and press the Enter key. The program will search for any occurrence of your string in any of these fields: name, invoice/postal address, main delivery address, short comments, customer abstract (long comments), Pacstream number, email address, phone number, mobile phone number.
If only one customer meets your search criterion, that customer will be displayed.
If more than one customer is found, a pop up browser window will be displayed from which you can choose the customer you want.
So an easy way to find a customer is to type their mobile phone number into the Find Customer window.

Return to:
	Customer Summary
	

.topic 197
  Customer masters created in Bookscan or other software may need to be groomed to allow you to use all of Bookscan's features.
Bookscan provides a window to speed up grooming your customer master. It has three separate functions:
·	Extract the surname from the (full) Name field. This allows you to search and index on the surname field.
·	Extract the post code from the second and third address lines.
·	Extract the state from the second and third address lines or calculate it from the post code.
Using the surname field allows you to do surname searches to find a customer.
Correct state and post code fields are necessary to make your mailing files comply with Australia Post's electronic sorting requirements.

Operating Instructions
The grooming window is opened main menu: select Utilities/Database Utilities/Groom Customer Master.

Click on the Load Database button.
This copies the customer master into a temporary file for you to work on. Any changes you make here will not be saved to the master file until you click on the Update Customer Master button.  While working in this window, you and other users should refrain from editing the customer postal addresses in the customer master window. Any edits will be lost when you save your temporary file back to your customer master file. You may still add new customers and their addresses.

Surname extraction
If the surname option is not already selected, click on the Surname radio button to select it.
The browser will display only those customer records with blank Surname fields.
Surname extraction consists of three steps, each step initiated by pressing in turn one of the three Go buttons. The order in which you do them depends on the format of your data:
If the majority of your customer records have the surname placed last in the Name field (e.g. 'John Smith' as opposed to 'Smith, John'), press the top Go button.
If the majority of the records are in the format 'Smith, John', you would run the middle option first.

Step 1
·	Click on the top Go button.
The system will copy the last word of the Customer field to the Surname field and check the Use column.
·	Scroll through the browser and uncheck (by double clicking on the checkbox) those records you do not want to update (e.g. company names). Unticking the Use field will clear the Surname field. If you make a mistake you can reverse it my double clicking the checkbox again; the Surname field will be re-populated.
·	You can use the right mouse menu to check all or uncheck all records and also to uncheck all above (or below) the currently selected record. This is useful if you only want to work on a portion of your database at a time.
·	You can now also manually edit the Surname field by double clicking on the entry you want to change and overtyping it.
·	Once you are ready click on the Update Customer Master button. This will save your changes to the customer master. Those records that have been updated will disappear from the browser, leaving only those records still to be done.

Step 2
If the some of the records are in the format Smith, John, initiate the second step by pressing the middle Go button. It none of your records are in this format you can skip the second step.
·	Click on the middle Go button to copy over first word of the Customer field to the Surname field.
·	Proceed as in step 1.

Step 3
The last step is used for company names. It copies the first 25 characters from the Customer field to the Surname field.
·	If the majority of your customers are companies you may wish to run this option first.
·	Click on the bottom Go Button.
·	Proceed as in step 1.
·	Any records not updated will need to be changed manually in the customer master.

Post code extraction
This operation extracts the first four digit number from first, the third address (shown in the Suburb/Town column) and then the second address field. You may wish to do the steps in the reverse order if most post codes are recorded on the second field. The system will only extract numbers whose preceding and trailing characters are a space, a comma or a full stop.
When the changes are saved, the customer master's post code field is updated and the post code (along with preceding and trailing spaces, commas or full stops) is removed from the address field.
Click on the Post code radio button to select the post code option.
The browser will display only those customer records with blank Post Code fields.
The Use column will move to be beside the Post Code column.
Post code extraction consists of two steps, each step initiated by pressing in turn one of the top two Go buttons.

Step 1
·	Click on the top Go button.
The system will extract the last possible post code of the third Suburb/Town field to the Post Cod field and tick the Use column.
·	Scroll through the browser and untick (by double clicking on the checkbox) those records you do not want to update (e.g. where phone numbers have been stored in this field). Unticking the Use field will clear the Post Code field. If you make a mistake you can reverse it by double clicking the checkbox again; the Post Code field will be re-populated.
·	You can use the right mouse menu to tick all or untick all records and also to untick all above (or below) the currently selected record. This is useful if you only want to work on a portion of your database at a time.
·	Once you are ready click on the Update Customer Master button. This will save your changes to the customer master. Those records that have been updated will disappear from the browser, leaving only those records still to be done.

Step 2
This step is the same as the step 1 except that the post code is extracted from the second address field.
·	Click on the middle Go button to extract the post code from the Address2 field.
·	Proceed as in step 1.

State extraction
The first two steps extract the state (e.g. NSW) from first, the third address (shown in the Suburb/Town column) and then the second address field. You may wish to do the steps in the reverse order if most states are recorded on the second field.
The third step uses the post code field to calculate the state. As state fields are usually optional you may not wish to use this option at all.  Also remember that this option will not extract the state from the address fields, as the first two steps do.
In the first two steps, the system checks for the characters listed in the 'Search For' box at the top of the window. This defaults to the standard abbreviations, Vic, NSW etc. You can add to this list in the 'Add State and Search Criterion' box. In the state field type the state's abbreviation e.g. TAS (use upper case) and in the Search For field type the search string e.g. Tasmania (case unimportant). Press the Enter key to add it to the list.
The system will only extract characters whose preceding and trailing characters are a space, a comma or a full stop.
When the changes are saved, the customer master's state field is updated and the search string code (along with preceding and trailing spaces, commas or full stops) is removed from the address field.

Step by step guide
·	Click on the State radio button to select the state option.
·	The browser will display only those customer records with blank State fields.
·	The Use column will move to be beside the State column.
State extraction consists of three steps, each step initiated by pressing in turn one of the Go buttons.

Step 1
·	Click on the top Go button.
The system will extract the last possible search string of the third Suburb/Town field to the State field and check the Use column.
·	Scroll through the browser and untick (by double clicking on the checkbox) those records you do not want to update. Unticking the Use field will clear the State field. If you make a mistake you can reverse it by double clicking the checkbox again; the State field will be re-populated.
·	You can use the right mouse menu to check all or uncheck all records and also to uncheck all above (or below) the currently selected record. This is useful if you only want to work on a portion of your database at a time.
·	Once you are ready click on the Update Customer Master button. This will save your changes to the customer master. Those records that have been updated will disappear from the browser, leaving only those records still to be done.

Step 2
This step is the same as the step 1 except that the state is extracted from the second address field.
·	Click on the middle Go button to extract the state the Address2 field.
·	Proceed as in step 1.

Step 3
The last step calculates the state from the post code field.
·	Click on the bottom Go Button.
·	Proceed as in step 1.
·	Any records not updated will need to be changed manually in the customer master.


Return to:
	Customer Summary



.topic 1820

Archiving titles removes them from the title master and stores them in the archive file. Earlier versions of Bookscan only saved selected fields from the title master to the archive. In the present version of the program all fields are retained.


All sales history is retained.

Why archive
By keeping the size of the title master down, you speed up searches. Archived title can be easily restored to the title master.  In the Title Master, select New (F11) once you enter the ISBN in the Code field and tab or enter, Bookscan will scan the archive to see if there is an archived record and ask if you want to recall it, if one is found.



Archiving
First re-index your master file and do your daily backup.
Open the Archiving window from the main menu: Utilities\Archives.
Select the date the titles were last sold.
Select the date the titles were last purchased
Select the date the titles were created.
Only titles with no stock, no special orders and none on order will be archived.






.topic 2770

Quantity Discounts is where you can set up prices for bulk purchase of a product. If say, you are selling pens at $1.50 each,
but also sell them in packs of 10 for $12.00, you can set up the pack price here.
Note that discounted price is only applied for full packs, not for quantities over the pack price. In our example above, buying 15 pens would see 10 charged at $1.20 each and five at $1.50.

Opening the Quantity Discount window
In the main menu, click on  Tables/ Pricing/ Quantity Discounts.

The Quantity Discount Offers window will open.

Adding a quantity discount
To add a quantity discount to a product, click the Add button and then enter the following details:

ISBN	Scan the barcode or type in the ISBN.
Quantity	Enter the pack size or discount quantity.
Sell price	Enter the sell price of the pack. Note - not the 	
	price per item.
Offer starts	If this is a limited offer, insert the start and end
/ends	dates. If no time limit, leave blank.

Click OK when done.

Other options

Edit	To edit a line, highlight it and click this button.
	You can change the quantity, price and offer
	dates.

Delete	Highlight the line you wish to delete and click this
	button

Hide/Show	Hides/displays offers past their end date.
Expired

Close	Closes the window .

.topic 1830

You can use the Promotions module to change temporarily both the selling price and the cost price of promotions stock.

When selling promotion stock  within the specified  dates, the selling price in the Cash Sales, Layby and Invoice screens will default to the promotion price.

Similarly, if the supplier is offering a special price, enter the price and the promotion dates in the Promotions screen.
Then, when receiving stock within those dates, the cost price in the Receiving screen will default to the special price.

Opening the Promotions window
In the main menu, click on Table, then point to Pricing and then click on Promotions.



The Maintain Promotions window will open.
This comprises two browsers - the upper one lists all the current  promotions and the lower one lists the items on the promotion highlighted in the upper browser.
To show expired promotions click on the Show Expired Promotions button.

Add a  new promotion
· Click on the Add Promo (F12) button  and fill in the promotion details:

Code	Unique six digit key for the promotion
	(e.g. XMAS04).

Name 	Full name of the promotion.

Start	Start date for the promotion.

End	Last day of the promotion.

Orders start	Start date for supplier's special prices.

Order End	End date for supplier's special prices.	

· When finished click the Save Promo (F12) button.

Edit a promotion
·	Double click on the promotion in the upper browser.
·	The various promotion fields will filled.
·	Edit these as required.
·	Click the Save Promo (F12) button to save your changes or  Clear Promo (Esc) button to discard them.

Delete a  new promotion
·	Right click on the promotion in the upper browser  to open the context menu.
·	Select Delete promotion.

Adding titles to the promotion
·	Highlight the required promotion in the upper browser.
·	Enter the product code or scan the barcode in the ISBN field.
·	Enter the Promotion Sell Price.
·	Enter the Promotion Cost Price.
·	Click Save Line (F12) when finished.

Edit a promotion line
·	Double click on the line in the lower browser.
·	The various promotion lines fields will filled.
·	Edit these as required.
·	Click the Save Line (F12) button to save your changes or  Clear Line (Esc) button to discard them.

Delete a  new promotion
·	Right click on the promotion line in the lower browser  to open the context menu.
·	Select Delete line from promotion.





.topic 2780
If you have special prices for customers for certain titles, you can enter the details here. When entering invoices,laybys and cash
sales for this customer, the system will automatically select the special price.

Opening the Promotions window
In the main menu, click on Tables/Pricing/Promotional Customer Prices.

The Special Customer Prices window will open.

Title discounted for several customers
In the Prices on ISBN window, scan the barcode or type in the ISBN.
All the customers with special prices for this product will be displayed ion the left hand browser.
To add a customer, click the left hand Add button.
Select the customer and enter the customer's special price.
Click OK .

Listing by customer
In the Customer field select the customer.
All the products for which this customers has special prices will be displayed ion the right hand browser.
To add a product, click the right hand Add button.
Select the product and enter the customer's special price.
Click OK .



.topic 1840

Using the imprint matrix will allow you to set percentage discounts against imprints for groups of customers.
To use the imprint matrix, set the flag  on the Titles tab in the System Options window.
The discount and customer type are entered in the Imprint Maintenance window.
The customer type is set on the details tab of the customer master.
Once the matrix is set the system will automatically select this price for these customers in cash sales, laybys and invoicing unless there is a lower price, say from a promotion; the system will always default to the lowest available price.

Note that using imprint matrix pricing precludes you from using the standard matrix.

Setting up the matrix
Open the Imprint Maintenance window (from the main menu, select Tables, then Imprint.).
If you have set the imprint matrix flag in system options, a browser will be displayed, showing two columns: Customer type and Discount.
The browser will show the discounts against each customer type for the imprint highlighted in the browser on the left.
To set discounts against an imprint:
·	Select the imprint by clicking on it. in the browser.
·	Double click on the required customer type in the right hand browser. This will open a dialogue window.
·	Enter the discount in the New Discount field and then click on the OK button.


.topic 1850

Supplier data is stored in the supplier.dbf table. Supplier details can be viewed in the Supplier Master window which can be opened in many places throughout the program:
·	From the main menu: select Tables/ Supplier Master.
·	By using the 'three person' icon on the toolbar (on the end at the right):

·	By using the F3 button in many windows in the program.

·	In many windows, clicking the Alt F3 button, will load the last supplier you used.

Supplier Master window
The Supplier Master window has seven tabs displaying different information about your suppliers:

Supplier tabs
·	Supplier – the supplier code fields, name and phone fields etc.
·	Address – customer's addresses, email address, Pacstream number, SAN and web site.
·	Detail – supplier's currency and receiving and accounts export settings.
·	List – contains a browser displaying all your suppliers.
·	Movements – a summary by month of the last year's sales, receipts, returns etc for the supplier.
·	Abstract – a free text form where you can record your notes about the supplier.
·	Contacts - shows all contacts listed for this supplier.

Displaying tabs
To open a tab (or close an open tab), use the right mouse to open the context menu and then select the required tab. Alternatively, use the shortcut keys listed at the bottom of the window. E.g. Alt F5 (i.e. hold the Alt button down and press the F5 function key) will open (or close) the Movements tab.
On each computer, you can save which tabs you want to open by default. With the window displaying only the tabs you want, and with the tab you want displayed first showing uppermost, use the right mouse to open the context menu and then select 'Save as default view'.
Note: to speed up the opening of the supplier master, you may wish to have only the tabs you regularly use open by default.



Tabs – detailed notes
Most of the fields in the supplier master are self- explanatory. Below are the fields which may need explaining.
Supplier tab
Code
A code of four characters is used to uniquely identify a supplier.
Changing a  code
You can change the supplier code here. Click on the right mouse button to open the context menu and select the Global Change option. A pop-up window will open where you can choose to type in the new code for your selected supplier or where you merge the current supplier into another supplier.

Contacts
You can record your various contacts in the contacts table. The primary contact is displayed next to the Contacts button. To view, add or edit contacts, click on the button. The will open the Contacts window. You can also view contacts on the Contacts tab



Notes
·	Use the arrow buttons on the left to navigate through the various contacts.
·	Use the arrow buttons on the right to navigate through the various addresses for this customer.
·	The main contact is set using the Main Contact (F8) check box.
·	To edit a contact, just start typing. The Add button caption will change to 'Save (F3)' and the Exit button to 'Cancel (Esc)'. Use the cancel button to undo any changes.
·	To add a contact, click the Add (F3) button. The fields will clear and you can type in the contact details.

Bill to key
Bill to key: if the supplier is a branch or division of a supplier, you can have their invoices billed to a head office. Enter that head office supplier code in the Bill to field.

Tax number
In Australia this is the ABN. In New Zealand it is the GST number.

Alternate supplier codes
Bowker GBIP and Nielsen Bookdata both have their own codes for suppliers. You can map your suppliers to theirs' by entering their supplier codes here.

Address tab
·	The supplier master allows for a postal address and an address for returns.
·	Clicking one of the Print Label buttons to print an address label.
·	For suppliers who have a Pacstream account, set the EDI combo box to 'Pacstream' and enter their SAN number in the SAN field.
·	For suppliers to whom you wish to email purchase orders set the EDI combo box to 'email' and ensure an email address is entered in the Email field.

Details tab
On the details tab you can set up information on how the supplier invoices you. Suppliers may invoice you using different pricing methods. They may give you a set discount off the recommended retail price or just charge you a set price. Foreign currency suppliers will charge you an amount in their currency; your cost price will vary with changes in the exchange rate. Most suppliers will include GST on prices on their invoices; some will only show it as a total. When setting selling prices, you may want to work on a standard margin or markup. To assist you when you are receiving products into stock, you can set up suppliers to reflect how they invoice you.

Currency field
Set this field to the currency the supplier uses on their invoices. If this currency is your local currency, the supplier will be set as 'local supplier'; otherwise the setting will be "foreign currency". By setting the supplier as foreign currency, the money amounts displayed in the Creditors windows and on Credit Claims will be the supplier's currency.
Note: you will need regularly to set the exchange rates in the Currency window as the Receiving window will use these to calculate your cost and sell prices. The Currency window is opened from the main menu: Tables/ Authority Tables/ Currency.

Standard discount
If the supplier gives you a standard discount, you can record it here.

GST inclusive
If the supplier's invoices show you cost price as inclusive of GST, tick this checkbox. The pricing fields in the receiving window will display prices with or without GST depending on this setting:



It you have this setting right, then in the Receiving window you can just copy in the price of each line from the invoice. This is much simpler than having to calculate the GST on each line.

In the above example:
·	The GST inclusive flag is set to true.
·	The pricing method is 'discount off retail' (see below)
·	Your standard discount is 45%.
·	
In the Receiving window:
·	The prices display 'Inc' to show they are GST inclusive.
·	The operator would type '29.95' into the Retail field.
·	The program would calculate the cost price of 16.47 which is inclusive of tax.
·	When the receipt is posted into stock, the cost price to be stored in the master will be 16.47 less the tax.

GST exempt
If the supplier's invoices do not have GST charges, tick this checkbox.

Pricing methods
See the Goods Inwards chapter for a full explanation of the effect of the pricing methods.

No Auto Calculations
With the checkbox 'No Auto Calculations' ticked, the edit line of the Receiving window will display according to the pricing method set, but it will not automatically calculate the Cost or Sell fields; you will need to overtype them when required.

Not Set
This option is the default option and will suit most suppliers.
In the Receiving window, you will need to manually key in the Cost, Sell and Retail Price where necessary. The 'No Auto Calculations' setting has not effect in this option.

Discount off retail
The Receiving window will display the Retail field as the first of the price fields. With 'auto calculations' set, the cost price will be calculated at retail less the supplier's standard discount.

Discount off sell
Note that this setting is very seldom used.
The Receiving window will display the Sell field as the first of the price fields. With 'auto calculations' set, the cost price will be calculated at selling price less the supplier's standard discount.

Markup on Cost
The Receiving window will display the price fields in the order: Cost, Markup, Sell, Retail. With 'auto calculations' set, the selling price will be calculated by applying the markup percentage to the cost price. The default markup used is the setting in the 'Discount' field.

Margin
The Receiving window will display the price fields in the order: Cost, Margin, Sell, Retail. With 'auto calculations' set, the selling price will be calculated by applying a set margin to the cost price. The default margin used is the setting in the 'Discount' field.

Foreign currency
The available pricing calculators for a foreign currency supplier are:
·	not set,
·	markup on cost,
·	margin

When a foreign currency supplier is selected in the Receiving window the display will change as illustrated below:



The exchange rate from the currency file is used to calculate the (local currency) cost price from foreign cost price. Using the margin or markup calculator is the same as for local currencies.

Other settings
·	Market country code – this setting is only used in creating Onix export files, so as to comply with the Onix standard.

·	Minimum order value – if the supplier has a minimum order value, you can enter it here. It will display in the Draft Orders window.

·	Lead time – the usual time in weeks that a supplier takes to deliver. It will display in the Draft Orders window.

·	Allow returns – if the supplier does not allow returns, tick this checkbox. By default, the supplier will be excluded when you regenerate a returns list.

·	Prompt for specials – if this flag is set, the program will display a pop up warning window when you attempt to create a special order with this company. If the supplier has a minimum order value or charges a small order surcharge, you should set this flag.

·	Exclude from accounts exports – exclude the supplier, and transaction for this supplier, exporting to MYOB.

·	Exclude from Onix exports – excludes products from this supplier from exporting to Onix files.


.topic 1860

Adding a new supplier
To add a supplier to the supplier master, click on the New (F11) button on the Supplier Master window. The pop-up window will open where you can enter the new supplier code. The program will check that the code is unique. Then type in the rest of the supplier's details directly into the tabs of the Supplier Master window. As each tab is completed and click the Save button.


Return To: Supplier Master Summary


.topic 1890

In many instances, when you open the Supplier Master window, the Find Supplier window will open above it; so you can immediately search for the supplier you want. Otherwise, open the Find Supplier window by clicking the Find (F2) button on the Customer Supplier window.



The search allows for five types of searches:
·	Name – search by the supplier name.
If more than one supplier fits the name search criterion, the List view of suppliers will open in alphabetical order from the name you requested. Scroll down the list and click on the one you require. Then click the Supplier tab or just double click the supplier.
If the supplier has been is identified uniquely, then the Supplier tab for the selected supplier will open.
·	Supplier Code - type in the supplier code.
·	Embedded - This is a powerful search that will look for a word or phrase in several fields of the supplier master. Type your search string into the Find field and press the Enter key. The program will search for any occurrence of your string in any of these fields: name, postal address, returns address, short comments, supplier abstract (long comments), email address, phone numbers and main contact.
If only one supplier meets your search criterion, that supplier will be displayed.
If more than one supplier is found, a pop up browser window will be displayed from which you can choose the supplier you want.


Return To:
	Supplier Master Summary
	

.topic 1900

The imprint master is the section of Bookscan where all title imprints are stored.
The imprints as shown in the diagram below are made up of a Code and Name.
Imprints being linked to a supplier is optional.
To open the Imprint Master window, on the main menu click Tables, then click Imprint Master.



Adding an imprint

Click the Add button.
Enter the imprint Code, Name and optional Supplier fields.
Then click OK button.


Edit an imprint

Click the Edit button.
Edit the Name field
Add, remove or change the Supplier field.
Then click OK button.


Global

Imprints
This will merge up to three (3) imprints into one code.
Click the Global Imprint option.
Click the Global button.
Enter the Imprint(s) you wish to change from.
Select the Imprint code to merge these into.
Then click OK button.

Supplier
Click the Global Imprint option.
Click the Global button.
Select the Imprint.
Select the Supplier to link to the imprint.
Then click OK button.


.topic 1910

Categories allow you to group both titles and customers and can be a very useful marketing tool.
A customer's categories are updated with each sale while a title's categories are manually added, usually at title set up.

Categories and Titles
· Categories can have a variety of uses. They can be used to search for titles, to select titles for say, inclusion in booklists or  for use on a web page.

· Titles are manually added to a category either during title set up or in title or category maintenance.

· A title can be in as many categories as you wish.
   For example, Kurma's Indian Cooking could be included in the Cooking, Indian Cooking and Vegetarian Cooking categories. It could also be included in the category Christmas 2002 Catalogue.

Categories and Customers
· The categories used for titles can also put against customers to allow you to track their interests. For example Needlework may be used for both titles and customers.

· You can also create categories for use just with customers for say mailouts.
	For example, you might have a category called Teachers and another Librarians. You could also have one called Invite which you could use to produce invitations lists.

· When you enter the Customer key during a cash sale or when creating laybys, invoices and special orders,  the system checks the categories of the items purchased, and if they are not already attached to the customer records, adds them.
   This feature can be turned on or off in System Options
.

· You can also manually add  customers to a category  in Category Maintenance.

· A customer can be in as many categories as you wish.

Using Categories
For assistance on using categories, click on the relevant link below:

Managing Categories	Adding, deleting and changing categories.
	Globally manipulating categories.
	Adding and removing titles from categories.
	Adding and removing customers from categories.
	
Reports by category	Sales - Best sellers
	Sales - Single category
	Sales - Multiple categories
	Titles by category.
	List all categories		

.topic 1920

Using the Category Menu
From the main menu click on Tables, then click on Categories.

This opens the Maintain Categories window, displaying a list of all the categories on the system.

The window is split into 3 browsers: Categories, Master Links and Customers Links.



Categories
This is located on the left side of the window and has displayed the listing of all Categories within the system in alphabetical order. The categories Code and name are displayed in the browser. To the left side of this are the buttons to manipulate the categories when clicked, these are:


Report
Print a list of all categories in alphabetical order.

Find	
Search for a category either by category code (fast search) or by name.
Then click OK.

Add	
To add a category link. When prompted enter:
Name:	Category name
New Code:	Category Code (max. six digits).
Then click OK.

Edit	
Globally manipulating categories.
Double clicking on the category's line in the browser will also allow editing.

Delete		
To delete a category that is selected (one at a time).


Master Links
This section of the window displays in its browser the titles linked to the selected category on the left side of the window.
In the browser only the item ISBN and Title are displayed.
The buttons to manipulate title links are:

Master Detail	
To display the Title Master detail of the selected title
Double clicking on a Title in the browser will also display its details.

Add Link
To add a link to a title either scan its barcode in the ISBN field when the Add Master Link window displays or click to search for the title (Add link for searching using the button it shows)

Delete Link
This will delete a link to any of the title links displayed
Highlight the title you wish to remove.
You can select more than one customer by holding down the Control (Ctrl) button and clicking on titles.
You can select a range of titles by clicking on the first title you require. Then holding down the Shift button, click the last title in your range.
Click on the Delete Link button
Click OK.

Customer Links
This section of the window located at the lower right side displays in its browser customers linked to the selected category on the left side of the window. The Customer browser only displays the Customer Key and customers full name ( Customer ).
The buttons to manipulate Customer links are:

Customer Detail	
To display the customers details from the Customer Master
Double clicking on the line will also do this.

Add Link	
To link a customer to the category click the Add Link buttin and select a customer from the pop up window that opens.

Delete Link
To remove a customer from a category.
Select the customer you wish to remove.
You can select more than one customer by holding down the Control (Ctrl) button and clicking on the customers you require.
You can select a range of customers by clicking on the  first customer you require.
Then, holding down the Shift button, click the last customer in your range.
Click on the Delete Link button
Click OK.


Exit	
To exit the categories master


Note: Titles can also be assigned to or removed from categories in the Title Master's Detail tab.

	     Return to Using Categories

.topic 1930

Clicking the Edit button in the Managing Categories menu opens the Edit Category Detail window.

Here you can globally:
	· Rename a category.
	· Change a category code.
	· Moving one category  for another.
	· Cloning a category from another.
		· Replacing a category with a new category.



Renaming a category
· In the Name box, overtype the category name and click OK.

Change the category code
· In the New Code box enter the new code (max. six digits).
· Click the Replace button
· Click OK.

Moving one category to another
· In the Category list select the category you are copying from.
· Click on the Edit button.
· In the Edit Category Detail window, overtype the category code to which you are copying in the New Code box.
· Click on the Move button.
· Click the appropriate radio button to update: 	
	· Titles only
	· Customers Only
	· Both titles and customers
· Click OK.
· The titles and/or customers will be appended to the second category and deleted from the first.

Cloning a category
· In the Category list select the category you are copying from.
· Click on the Edit button.
· In the Edit Category Detail window, overtype the new category code in the New Code box.
· In the Name box, overtype the new category's name.
· Click on the Clone button.
· Click the appropriate radio button to update: 	
	· Titles only
	· Customers Only
	· Both titles and customers
· Click OK.
· The new category will be created with the titles and/or customers appended. The original category will be unchanged.

Replacing a category with a new one
· In the Category list select the category you are copying from.
· Click on the Edit button.
· In the Edit Category Detail window, overtype the new category code in the New Code box.
· Click on the Clone button.
· Click the appropriate radio button to update: 	
	· Titles only
	· Customers Only
	· Both titles and customers
· Click OK.
· The new category will be created with the titles and/or customers appended. The original category will be destroyed.
· The new category will take its name from the original one.

	    Return to Using Categories



.topic 1940

The Department Master is the section of Bookscan where all departments are stored.
The departments are shown in the diagram below are made up of a Code and Name.
Imprints being linked to a supplier is optional.
To open the Department Master window, on the main menu click Tables, then click Departments.



Adding a department

Click the Add button.
Enter the imprint Code, Name.
Then click OK button.


Edit a department

Click the Edit button.
Edit the Name field
Then click OK button.


Global

Titles 	
This will change the department the title is in.
Click the Global Title option.
Click the Global button.
Select the Former Department
Select the New Department.
Then click OK/Change button.



Category
Click the Global Category option.
Click the Global button.
Select the target Category.
Select the New Department.
Then click OK/Change button.



.topic 1950

The Branches 'master' relates to multi-store businesses that use the inter-store transfering. If you are running only a single store business, this section does not need completing.

You can add a new branch or edit an existing branches details in the Maintain Locations window.
You can also print a list of stores and their YTD sales.

From the main menu click Tables, then point to Authority Tables and then click on Branches.



Add a location
To set up a new location, click on the Add button.

Enter the store's Branch Code (unique two character) and Name, ,number and address.

Optionally you can also complete these fields:

Address ,  Contact ,  Phone,  Email, and  UnMap file	.

Click the Save button when done.

Edit a location
Select the branch you want to edit and click the Edit button.
Overtype the fields you wish to change (except the Location
Code which may not be altered).
Click the Save button when done.

.topic 1970

The Sales Rep Master is the section of Bookscan  where you can store and manage the Sales Reps  that your business has.
To open the Sales Rep Master, on the main menu click on Tables, then move the mouse arrow onto Authority Tables so its sub menu shows, then click on Sales Reps.



As shown above when the Sales Rep Master is loaded it look this. In the top half are the fields to be entered for entering a new Rep and at the bottom the Reps within the database are listed.
To leave the Sales Rep Master at any time click Exit button.

Adding a sales rep:
To add a new sales rep click on the Add button.
This will clear the text box fields, which indicates that you need to type in the details.
The minimum  fields required as Rep Code (maximum 4 characters) and Name (maximum 30 characters).
The other fields are optional.
Next click Save button. This will save the new Rep
Otherwise click Clear to not save the record.


Editing a sales rep:
To make changes to an existing sales rep, simply click on the rep from the listing in the bottom half of the window.
Click on the Edit button.
This will display the reps details in the top half of the window in the same fields as when the rep was entered.
Type in your changes.
Note: the Rep Code cannot be changed.
Click the Save button. This will save the changes.
Otherwise click Undo button, which will leave the sales rep unchanged.



.topic 1980

The currencies section of Bookscan allows for you to maintain the different currencies you can use within the system, such as applying a foreign currency to a supplier.
To maintain suppliers on the main menu click on Tables,then point to Authority Tables and then click on Currencies



Add
To add a new currency, click on the Add button.
Enter the following:
Currency Code (2 characters)
Currency Name (20 characters)
Currency Symbol (1 character)
Currency exchange Rate (to local currency)

Click the OK button.

Edit
To edit an existing currency click on the currency and click the Edit button
You can make changes to:
Currency Name (20 characters)
Currency Symbol (1 character)
Currency exchange Rate (to local currency)



Click the OK button.

Delete
To delete an existing currency click on the currency and click the Delete  button
Next click the OK button, and then click the Yes button.

Close
To exit the currencies section, click this button.


.topic 1990

The bindings section of Bookscan allows for the storing and maintaining of the bindings you wish to contain within your database. These bindings can be included in the details of a title. To maintain the bindings click on Tables,then point to Authority Tables and then click on Bindings



To be ONIX compliant:
To load and use the ONIX compliant bindings, press the F12 key on your keyboard, then click Yes. This will load all the ONIX bindings automatically. Using the correct ONIX bindings will enable this to be correctly applied to any titles imported/updated from Title Page.
If you do not have the ONIX bindings, when you import titles from Title Page, it will leave the field blank for these titles.  Alternatively, you can use your existing bindings and map them to ONIX codes by double clicking on the binding or selecting one & clicking on the Edit (F4) button as per the Edit entry below.

To manage the bindings: (custom bindings/become ONIX compliant if currently not or to not be onix compliant. Use the following)

Add
To add a new binding click on the Add button.
Next fill in:
Code (2 characters)
Name
Group classification (Select from drop down) optional
ONIX code (select from drop down) optional

Click the OK button.

Edit
To make changes to an existing binding, click on the binding and click the Edit button. You can make changes to:
Name
Group classification (Select from drop down) optional
ONIX code (select from drop down) optional

Click the OK button.

Global
To change all items marked as one type to another. E.g. Code AA to Code BB.
Note: Must be existing codes.

Click on the binding you wish to change from.
Click the Global button.
The from Code will be displayed in the Absorb Binding Code field.
Type in the code you wish to change it into in the Into Binding Code field.
Click the OK button.

Delete
To remove an existing binding click on the record.
Then click the Delete button.
Then click Yes.

Close
To close the bindings section click on the Close button.



.topic 2000

The Publishers section of Bookscan allows for you to maintain the different publishers you can use within the system.
To maintain Publishers on the main menu click on Tables,then point to Authority Tables and then click on Publisher



Note: To successfully load publisher details when importing from title page, ensure the publishers appear within this window.

Add
To add a new Publisher, click on the Add button.
Enter the following:
Publishers Code (4 characters)
Publishers Name
Publishers Role (Select from drop down) optional

Click the OK button.

Edit
To edit an existing Publishers click on the currency and click the Edit button
You can make changes to:
Publishers Name
Publishers Role (Select from drop down) optional

Click the OK button.

Delete
To delete an existing Publisher click on the Publisher and click the Delete  button
Click the OK button, and then click the Yes button.

Close
To exit the Publisher section, click this button.


.topic 2560
Browser Fields
Pos
Position, from the left, in the tendering window where the transaction type button will show.
You can change the position of a transaction by doulble clicking on it in this column.  Moving up or down is determined by the setting of the radio buttons at the bottom right of the window.

Code	
Abbreviation for the transaction used by the system. E.g. CHQ for cheque.

Description	
Full Name of the transaction. E.g. Visa.

NCD
No cash drawer. Stops the cash drawer from opening during a counter sale.

EFTPOS
EFTPOS transaction.

CO
Allow cash out in EFTPOS transactions

Type
Options are:
Standard
Require name - a standard transaction but in the Tendering window  the operator has to enter a name or code against the transaction.
Tracked voucher - tracked vouchers, numbered & stored in the system
Untracked Voucher - an untracked gift voucher worth the amount recorded on it
Cheque
Instant Rew. Vou. - If using the rewards at point of sales, this will allow use of the customers current reward or part thereof.  If they only use part, they may fall below the threshold set in the reward program & be unable to redeem the rest until they once again reach the minimum.  This option will cause the tender type to appear at the far right of the tendering window regardless of the number of tender types.


Surch
Used for applying surcharges on credit cards.

RO
Rewards voucher.  A voucher issued by generating customer rewards through the rewards program.

Hide
Obsolete transaction type, will not display in the Tendering window, but is available for transaction history reports.

	


Default tender types
There is the ability to set which tender types are used by default in areas of Bookscan. You can set these for Cash Sales, Order Processing (Invoiving, Special Orders) and Debtor Payments. Set these by selecting what they are via the drop-down list in System Options - Financial tab.

Click OK button to save the settings.


.topic 2600
Many users want to apply a surcharge on certain types of credit cards which charge higher fees. In the transaction window set percentage charges against the relevant credit card types, say 1.5 % on Diners Club and 2.5% on Amex.
When you select these transactions in the Tendering window, the surcharge is added to the total price. You can overwrite the percentage in the Tendering window if you wish.


.topic 2010

The Transport section of Bookscan allows for you to maintain the different Transporters you can use within the system. (E.g. Australia Post)
To maintain Transport on the main menu click on Tables,then point to Authority Tables and then click on Transport.

Add
To add a new Transport method, click on the Add button.
Enter the following:
Transport Code (4 characters)
Transport Name
Default Carrier (Check box to select)
Cube Weight (Check box to select)
Weight (Check box to select)
No Consignment Notes (Check box to select)
Con Note Per Carton (Check box to select)

Click the OK button.

Edit
To edit an existing Transport method, click on the Transport and click the Edit button
You can make changes to:
Transport Name
Default Carrier (Check box to select)
Cube Weight (Check box to select)
Weight (Check box to select)
No Consignment Notes (Check box to select)
Con Note Per Carton (Check box to select)

Click the OK button.

Delete
To delete an existing Transport method, click on the Transport and click the Delete  button.
Next click the OK button, and then click the Yes button.

Close
To exit the Transport section, click this button.



.topic 2020

The Returns Reasons section of Bookscan allows for you to maintain the different Returns Reason you may want to use within the system. (E.g. Short Supply)
To maintain Returns Reasons on the main menu click on Tables,then point to Authority Tables and then click on Returns Reasons.
The return reasons will shown on your Return Authorisation request and Returns reports when printed.

Add
To add a new Returns Reason, click on the Add button.
Enter the following:
Code (3 characters)
Name

Click the OK button.

Edit
To edit an existing Returns Reason, click on the Returns Reason and click the Edit button
You can make changes to:
Code
Name

Click the OK button.

Delete
To delete an existing Returns Reason, click on the Returns Reason and click the Delete  button.
Then click the Yes button.

Close
To exit the Returns Reasons section, click this button.


.topic 2030

The Status section of Bookscan allows for you to maintain the different Status you may want to use within the system. (E.g. Active). The status' are a field used within the Title Master that can be set for each title to indicate the status of that title.
To maintain Status' on the main menu click on Tables,then point to Authority Tables and then click on Status.



ONIX Status'
To load the ONIX standard Status codes, press F12, this will populate them.
If you already have your own custom status codes, simply use the Global functionality as described below to merge your old codes into the ONIX ones.

Status Fields
Code -  3 characters code to uniqely identify the status
Description - the description of the status
B/O - Stock that is allowed to be back ordered. (wholesale)
No Sell - Stock that cannot be sold (e.g. Harry Potter, prior to release date, may have a status of 'Awaiting Date', to stop it being sold accidently). This will not allow the item to be sold anywhere in the program.
Web - Stock thats not to be exported when using the Web Export module
No ONIX - Stock that's not to be exported when creating ONIX files using the ONIX export.


Manage Status Codes

Add
To add a new Status, click on the Add button.
Enter the following:
Code (3 characters)
Name
ONIX code (select from drop down list) optional. This allows you to map the ONIX code, to your own codes. This is helpful when importing titles from title page etc.
Allow backorders (check box to select) - a tick means to allow.
No Sell (check box to select)  - a tick means to exclude from sell able stock
Allow web sales (check box to select) - a tick means to exclude

Click the OK button.

Edit
To edit an existing Status, click on the Status and click the Edit button
You can make changes to:
Name
ONIX code (select from drop down list) optional
Allow backorders (check box to select) - a tick means to allow.
No Sell (check box to select)  - a tick means to exclude from sell able stock
Allow web sales (check box to select) - a tick means to exclude



Click the OK button.

You can edit 'No Sell', 'No ONIX', 'B/O', and 'Web' can be edited from the list view by  double-clicking on the tick boxes themselves.

Global
To globally change one status codes links into another.  Doing this will run through and anywhere that the old code is stored, it will replace it with the new code.
Click the Status and click Global.
Absorb Status code : The one you are changing
Absorb Into Code: The code you are changing to.

Click the OK button.

Delete
To delete an existing Status, click on the Status and click the Delete button.
Then click the Yes button.

Close
To exit the Status section, click this button.

.topic 2040

The Subjects/KLA section of Bookscan allows you to create subjects and have them linked to ONIX codes. This enables an imported title (an ONIX import) to use the ONIX code and change it to a BIC Subjects code that it has been associated with.
You can also associate the subjects with Key Learning Areas, which are managed in this window also.

To open Subjects/KLA on the main menu click Tables, move the cursor on Authority Tables and then click Subjects/KLA.

ONIX BIC Subjects
To load the ONIX standard BIC subjects when in this window, press F12, this will allow you to not have to key them in.


Managing Subjects

Subjects
Subjects are displayed in list form in the top half of the window.

Add
To add a new Subject click on the Add button.
Enter in the following:
Code (maximum 6 characters )
Name
ONIX code (Select from drop down) Optional
Key Area (Select from drop down) Optional

Click the OK button

Edit
To modify an existing Subject click on the subject, then click the Edit  button.
You may make changes to:
Code (maximum 6 characters)
Name
ONIX code  (Select from drop down) Optional
Key Area (Select from drop down) Optional

Click the OK button

Delete
To delete an existing Subject click on the subject, then click the Delete button.
Click the Yes button.

Close
To close the window click the Close button.


Key Learning Areas
This is located in the bottom half of the window.
When a Subject is clicked, it will display the KLA associated with it in the Key Learning Area drop down list.

Add KLA
To add a new Key Learning Area, click the Add KLA button.
Enter in a Code and Name
Click the OK button

Edit  KLA
Using the Key Learning Area drop down list, select the KLA you wish to edit then click the Edit KLA button.
You can make changes to the Name field.
Click the OK button

Delete KLA
Using the Key Learning Area drop down list, select the KLA you wish to delete then click the Delete KLA button.
Click the Yes button








.topic 2050

The schools that will be used for the pre-pack module will be stored in this section of Bookscan.
From the main menu click Tables,then point to Authority Tables and then click on Schools

Schools
Add
Click the Add button.
Complete the fields.
Code and Name are the only required fields.
Click the OK button.

Edit
Click on the school record and click the Edit button.
Make changes to the fields. Code cannot be changed.
Click the OK button.

Contacts
Contacts are the people at the school that will be contacted when there is any enquires.

Click the Contacts button to display the contacts window and use the following options. Any contacts will be displayed in the list here.

Add Contact
To add new contacts click the Add Contact button.
The new contact will be displayed in the list

Remove Contact
To remove a contact from the school click on the contact and click the Remove Contact  button.
Click the Yes button.
The contact will now be removed.

Close
To return to the Schools window, click the Close button.


.topic 2070

The import window allows you to import titles into the Bookscan Master database in one of the following 4 formats. CSV, ONIX, BISAC and Bookfind TAGGED format and CSV.

The import window from the main menu is located in Utilites-->Import.

Obtaining Import Files

To import files from one of the supported web sites, right click the mouse and you will be offered a context menu with each of these sites. Select one and Internet explorer will open at the corresponding web site. Follow the web site instructions and download a file in one of the 3 formats. Then follow the previous step to import the file into the import browser. Opening the Import window will create the directory "c:\import" automatically for you. Use this directory for a consistent place to download files from the web sites and import them into Bookscan.
Files can be imported from elsewhere too. (as shown below)



Importing/Loading Files

To load a file on a disk/local hard drive simply click on the file cabinet in the file detail box and select the drive, directory and filename.
Then click on the "import file" button. If the file is in one of the 4 formats Bookscan will automatically detect which one and prompt to import the file into the import browser. At this stage you will then be viewing the contents of the import file (nothing has been saved at this stage). CSV files require special setups to be done, so before using this for the first time, speak to barcode solutions.

When the file loads and displays into the browser, if the title is already in your master file, it will have a tick in on the left-hand side in the 'I' column.
Note: If a title is already in your database, if you select it and use the 'Import Selected Titles', it will not touch this title.

Adding to Draft PO when Importing

The column "DPO Qty" can be edited to allow the direct importing of titles into Draft Purchase orders for titles being imported for the first time and when updating existing titles.
Double click on the DPO Qty square for the rows and you can enter a quantity that will be added to the DPO when the title is imported/Updated. Clicking on the "DPO Qty" column header caption will also filter titles so you will only see titles that you have entered a DPO Qty into.

Options for Importing
 Price/Status Update - With this ticked, when updating titles already in your master database, it will only change the Retail Price and Product Status. This will be ticked by default and will enable any grooming that has been carried out to remain in place.
Get Images - This will allow Bookscan to obtain from the internet any images that have been included in an ONIX import file (generally an internet address of where the image is that our program will download) and store under the Publisher tab in the title master. This will slow the process down a little and requires internet access.
Manual Edit - The manual edit checkbox if checked, will also open the normal Bookscan title master window on each title to allow further editing of other master title fields. Once you have edited the title click the "select" button to accept the changes or the "cancel" button to discard the changes and optionally abort the rest of the import.


Selecting Titles to Save/Update

Once the contents of the file are listed, you can use the "Find ISBN" button to find a particular title by BARCODE / ISBN.
To import these titles into Bookscan highlight the ones you want using standard windows selection / blocking commands.

To select individual titles hold CTRL and click the left mouse button.
To select a block of titles hold SHIFT and left mouse click the first title in the block and then click the last title that you want to select.
To select all titles use the "Select All" button to highlight all titles to be imported / updated.

Importing New Titles

Once you have highlighted the titles for import you must select a supplier that these titles will be imported with from the supplier combo box.
If you also wish to have the Publisher information updated at the same time (Stored in Tables-->Authority Tables--Publisher), select from the drop-down list for Publishers.
Next click the "Import Selected Titles" button.  Then click 'Yes' to confirm.
That's all there is to it. Once you have imported  titles they will change colour to red to indicate that you have already processed them. It will also tick the 'I' column.

Updating Exisiting Titles

Once you have highlighted the titles for import (For updating, you do not need to Select a Supplier or Publisher)

The fields that will get updated are(Unless 'Price/Status Update' is ticked) : Title, Author, RRP, Edition, Year, Binding, Status, Supplier ( if one is selected in the supplier combo box, otherwise will not change ), publisher  ( if one is selected in the publisher combo box, otherwise wont change ) , and all the fields visible on the publisher tab page of the Bookscan master title window.

To Update, click "Update Selected Titles" button. This will update all titles that are selected, that are currently in your database. (If a title is not ticked, it will not add it).





Most of the columns in the import browser can be sorted to make it easier to find the titles you are looking for, especially if there are many titles in the import file. Simply click on the column header caption to re-sort the titles by that column.

Importing Images

Click on the browse icon & select a text file with just a list of ISBN's only.  One ISBN per line.

Click on Images.  Bookscan will import images for the ISBN's listed in the text file from either Nielsen or Bowker, depending on your settings, in the sizes you have selected in the Title Master - Web Search - Set Defaults window.



.topic 2080

The export functionality allows for titles stored on the database be saved into a standardised format, sent to another location and imported.
 This can be handy between stores where one location does not have online access and another one does.
The store who would be receiving it would then use the import functionality , click link for details on this.

The format of exporting can be one of two options:
·	ONIX
·	BISAC

Note: After picking the method the rest of the process is the same.
To export in one of the formats on the main menu click Utilities, move the mouse on Export, then click on either ONIX or BISAC.

Note: If using the ONIX export, titles must have the following fields populated, otherwise they will be excluded:
	(Details Tab) Title, Author, Retail Price, Status, Supplier, Binding, Imprint.
	(Publisher Tab) Publisher, Pub Date, BIC Subject, Blurb/Review (optional).

Note: If a titles status has in the status master been set to 'No ONIX', those titles will not be included.



As shown in the diagram there are a number of options on the left-hand side that you can select to pick the titles to export.

Step 1: Select Retrieval method
Select on the option you wish to use to select titles to export by clicking an option on the left-hand side.
For full details see Retrieval options section below.

Step 2: Enter a file name
In the field Export to (file-spec) field either type in the full path of the file including the file name.
Alternatively click on the file icon button on the right side of this field.  Select the save location, and type in the file name.

Step 3: Zipping
To Zip (Compress) the file, check the Package into Zip file by clicking on its box.

Step 4: Exporting
Click on the OK/Export button.
The file will be saved in the location you selected ready for external use.


Retrieval options
Exclusion Options
·	On-hand items only
Will include only titles that are currently on-hand in stock if checked.
This option can be used in conjunction with any of the Selection Options

Status exclusion
If in Tables-->Authority Tables-->Status, the 'No ONIX' field has been ticked for a status, titles with that status will not be included in the export.

Selection Options
·	All in database
Includes all titles if checked

·	By records-number
Will display two fields:
·	First record to retrieve
·	Last records to retrieve
These are the order in which they were added to the database, NOT the order they appear in the Title Master List.
The default setting is all titles 1 - title count.
Key in any changes if required.
e.g. 553 records, wish to export last 100 added.
	First record to retrieve: 453
	Last record to retrieve: 553

·	By record entry date
will display two date fields:
·	Start of record entry
·	End of record entry
This will included any titles added between and including the dates entered.
Select using the date icon.


·	By year
This is to export any titles that fall within a year.
Type in the year in the Year Code field.
e.g. 2004

·	By imprint
This will export any titles that belong to a specific imprint.
Select the imprint from the imprint drop down list. Using a drop down list, click link.
You can only select one imprint.

·	 By supplier
This will export any titles that belong to a specific supplier.
Select the supplier from the supplier drop down list. Using a drop down list, click link.
You can only select one supplier.

·	 By department
This will export any titles that belong to a specific department.
Select the department from the department drop down list. Using a drop down list, click link.
You can only select one department.

·	 By customer
This will export any titles that have been purchased by a specific customer.
Select the customer from the customer drop down list. Using a drop down list, click link.
You can only select one customer.

·	 By category
This will export any titles that belong to a specific category.
Select the category from the category drop down list. Using a drop down list, click link.
You can only select one category.

·	By individual selection
When this option is checked you will be able to individual select the titles to include to export.
Multiple selection is allowed.

Upon checking this option the Find Title window will display, behind that will be the list of all titles.
Click on the desired titles. You can select multiple by holding down the Ctrl key while clicking.
If the find window is closed you can use it again by clicking Find Title button.



Exception List
Titles that are excluded from the export due to missing fields will display a window following the export, listing the product code(s) and an abbreviation of what is missing;
Titl: Title (name)
AUTH: Author
Impr: Imprint
BIND: Binding
Price: Retail Price
PubDate: Publication Date
BIC: BIC Main Subject
Stat: Status
Pub: Publisher
Supp: Supplier




This list can be printed out by clicking the 'Print' button, so these can be corrected for next time, or corrected, then re-exported.





See also
	Importing

.topic 2090

To use the on screen calculator, click on the blue calculator icon on the toolbar

				


.topic 2240


The Copy Out Tables is used to resolve intermittent issues with comment fields in database files.  A re-index will follow the Copy Out.
 Ensure that all terminals are back to the main menu.
#Note: Running this on the server machine will allow for this  to run as fast as possible.
#Note: Some of the windows will say 'Structure Update' on them, but it is doing a Copy Out.

On the main menu click Utilities/Database Utilities/Copy Out Tables.
A message will display requiring you to confirm you have exclusive access. In accordance with the above note, click Yes.
Click Select All (you can also do individual database files if required)
Click Copy Out. This will run the Copy Out procedure, then run a re-index. This may take some time depending on the size of your database. Purging of old files and 'Packing' regularly will help improve the speed of Bookscan.
When the process is finished a message 'Copy Out Completed' will show. Click Ok, then Close.


.topic 213

Packing the tables is run to ensure that any files within the database that records that have been marked for deletion are deleted. This will help free up an data that is not required and help speed up the system and increase the free space on your computer.
This needs to be run on the server machine and at a time when Bookscan is not being used on any of the machines.

 Ensure that all terminals are back to the main menu.

On the main menu click Utilities/Database Utilities/Pack Tables.
Click OK to acknowledge that you have closed all other windows of Bookscan on all machines down.
Click Select All button (to run this procedure for all tables).
Click Pack button.

When complete a message will display indicating this, click OK button.


You can resume using Bookscan on all machines.

.topic 2110

WARNING:  To back up your files you will require exclusive access to Bookscan.
 Ensure that all terminals are back to the main menu.

The backup data files functionality allows for your database to be saved as a restore point in the event serious problems.

·	From the main menu, click on Utilities/Database Utilities/Backup Data Files.
·	This will open the backup window.
·	The backup will be saved to the data directory. This will overwite the previous backup. To save to another drive select the drive from the combo box.
·	Click on the Backup button.
·	All your data files and your reports will be zipped up and saved as the file ebbackup.zip. This may take some time depending on the size of your database.
When finished, a line will be selected in blue 'Zip Archiving Complete'.
·	Click on Exit when done.

.topic 2100

It is important to regularly re-index to ensure the integrity of your database. You should also do it after a system crash or if any anomalous data appears.
 Ensure that all terminals are back to the main menu.

· From the main menu, click on Utilities/Database Utilities/Reindex Tables.

· Highlight those tables you wish to reindex (by clicking on them)  or click on Select All.

· Click on the Re-index button.

The time it takes to re-index will depend on the speed of the computer you run the re-indexing on, the speed of your network and the  size of your databases. Running this on the server machine, if you have one will allow it to run the fastest. Regularly purging and 'Packing' your files will considerably speed up re-indexing time also.

.topic 211

The Structure update is what takes place when changes have been done to the systems database structure, typically when new versions are installed. When new versions are installing, upon opening Bookscan for the first time this will run automatically.
 Ensure that all terminals are back to the main menu.
Running this allows for these changes to be made to you existing database to reflect the new structure.
Running this can also be used to repair problems with the database where the structure has been affected.

 To run a structure update on the main menu click Utilities/Database Utilities/Structure Update, click OK, Click Yes.

This will then run the update.

Note: A structure update can take some time depending on database size. The time can be reduced by regular purging of un-necessary records and also regular 'Packing' of the data files.
Note: Running a structure update will also run a re-indexing on the database too.


.topic 2310
Archiving sales records

The Archive Maintenance window is located from the main menu of Bookscan, Utilities -> Archives or through Utilities -> Database Utilities -> Archive Maintenance.

In this window you will be able to Archive/Purge/Retrieve most of the following, but it is important that you read carefully how these work and the best way to do it.

Invoice Header Records - Invoices headers for invoices older than they need to be readily accessible
Invoice Line Records - Run following archiving old invoice headers to remove the corresponding lines of the invoice
Sales Lines Records - History of the product sold and all details of when the item was sold (including sell price, date etc)
Sales History Records - Histories of sales of stock.
Stock History Records - Histories of stock inwards, returns and transfers (in/out)
Titles  - Archives titles older than 1 year that are currently have zeros (for onhand, on order, layby, Special Order, Approval, Consignment) and have not been sold/received in 1 year or more. Important Note: Currently there is no way to get these titles back out of this archive, so be careful when using this.



Archiving

To archive old lines within a backup storage file, that have past a useful time frame is a good way to keep the system running at it's best. It also shows on the more current information that you need.

Select the Archive file type. Select from the Archive Records the date you wish to archive on or before.
Click Archive Records (F12). Confirm by clicking Yes button.

Note: If archiving a file type for the first time and wishing to archive many years of data, it is advisable that you do so in 1 year lots (working backwards from the present).

This will run for as long as it takes depending on the number of records that need to be moved. When it is done, it will fill the window with records listen, these are the records that have been moved into the archive. If when you first load the window and select a file type, if records are already listed this is because it has been run before and the records shown are being loaded from the archive (This helps if you wish to retrieve records from the archive).

Note: After running the archiving, you will need to run a pack (Utilities -> Database Utilities -> Pack Tables -> Select All -> Pack. )

This works the same for all the options within the Archive File menu.

Retrieving sales records

This window will also allow you to retrieve back into the main database files records that have been archived previously.

Select a Archive File type. This will then load records shown in the archive.

Select either a date range (to pull back records between two dates) or in the list of records below, hold Ctrl and click on individual records you wish.

Click Restore Records (F11). This will then move the old records back. (This may take some time depending on the number of records).

Purging sales records

You can also purge records that have been archived (so that over the time the archive files themselves do not have data that's too old).

Select a Archive File type. This will then load records shown in the archive.

Select either a date (of which to delete where older than) or in the list of records below, hold Ctrl and click on individual records you wish.

Click Purge Records (F9). This will then delete the records permanently. (This may take some time depending on the number of records).

Title Archive

Archiving titles removes them from the title master and stores them in the archive file. Earlier versions of Bookscan only saved selected fields from the title master to the archive. In the present version of the program all fields are retained.

All sales history is retained.

Archived title can be easily restored to the title master.  Go to Sales / Enquiry / Archive Enquiry and search by Author, Title or ISBN.  You will be shown a list of matches from which you can select



Archiving
First re-index your master file and do your daily backup.
Select the date the titles were last sold.
Select the date the titles were last purchased
Select the date the titles were created.
Only titles with no stock, no special orders and none on order will be archived.



Supplier Purge

This functionality will remove suppliers from the Supplier master that are not being used. It determines this by using a supplier and if no products are linked to this, it will delete them (the supplier).

Right click in the archive window, then select "Purge un-used suppliers". This may take some time to run depending on the size of your title master. It is a good idea if you do this following running the Title archive.


.topic 2250
The Build Blank Database function allows you to create a 'blank' copy of your database to use at another site. This is handy if you are opening a new branch of your business or wish to create a blank copy of your database to send to someone else.

What does a 'Blank' database contain;
Titles (Including Names, Authors, suppliers, prices, publisher details, categories, department, abstract, comments)
Customers (Including Names, Addresses, Phone numbers, email address, financial details)
Suppliers( All details, except stock movement/history)
Bindings
Currencies
Imprints
Departments
Location
Publishers
Return Codes
Sales Reps
BIC Subjects
Transport

What does it not contain:
Titles (Sales/Purchasing/Layby/movements/approval/backorders/consignment/specials history, stock figures[all])
Customers (Specials, laybys, backorders, purchases)
Suppliers (Stock movements/history)

Creating a Blank Database
To open the Build Blank Database, got to the main menu and select Utilities/Database Utilities/Build Blank Database.

Select a path to save the copy of the database to.
Click OK button. The time to run will depend on the size of your master files.
When finished a message 'Process Complete' will display. This should say '15 database created'. Click OK.
Click Cancel.



Using the Blank Database
To move the newly created blank database you will need to burn it to a CD/DVD and take/send it to the new site. Copy this folder onto C:\ of the server machine. Bookscan at this new site will need to be installed and point to this folder as the data directory.

If you are giving the blank database to another store and you wish to not pass on your customer details, simply go into the  blank databases folder delete the files 'Customer.dbf' and 'Customer.fpt'. The same can be done for your sales Reps also, but following the same process.


.topic 215

The Standby functionality of the Bookscan allows for terminals that have their databases remotely, (on a different machine on the network), to operate when there is temporary loss of connection to that database.

The standby functionality will activate when Bookscan is started and there is no connection to the database.  It will prompt the user to initiate standby when this is the case.
When connection to the database is reinstated and Bookscan is restarted, it will also prompt the user to ask if they wish to transfer all transactions that took place while in standby back to the main database.  If you choose not to, they will be stored and you will be asked again the each time Bookscan starts until they have been uploaded.

You can also choose to enter/exit standby by using the Utilities - Set/Unset Standby option.  Again, when you exit standby, if any sales have been made, you will be prompted to upload them.

Preparing for standby
Running in standby mode can only work if preparations are made at regular intervals (Suggest weekly).
This preparing will create a copy of the titles, customers and suppliers etc currently in the database onto the local machine in C:\standby directory.

·	To run the preparations on the main menu click Utilities, then click Create Standby.
·	Read the information.
·	Then click Start button.
·	This will then create a backup of the information required to run in standby mode, then run a re-index on the backup database.
·	When this finishes click OK button.

.topic 2120

Once you have set up  Bookscan  be very careful of what features you change in Systems Options. Some of the setup features are purely technical and should not be altered except in consultation with Barcode Solutions. Others control the way the system (and your business) operates and you may need to change them as your business practices change.
The following is a guide to those features:

To open the System Options set of windows, click on Utilities in the main menu. Then click on System Options.

System Options windows
Below is a summary of the system option windows. Click on the
window name for details.

Licensee 	This is where the basic details of the shop are stored.				

Stores	If you have multiple stores, you can set up how they will interact here.

Dockets	These fields control how your computer system is set up.

Copies	This window allows you to set the number of copies you will print of each document and set some other system defaults.

Modules & Options	In this window you can select which Bookscan modules you will be using.

Financial	In this window you can set a variety of financial defaults.

Counters	In this window, you can set the numbering sequences for your documents.

Titles	In this window you can set up the defaults for your title master.

Purchasing     	Here you can set the defaults for the purchasing screens.		

Sales	This window has various system options which you can set, particularly relating to sales.

Sundry	This window allows you to set various system options and allows you to access purchasing budget figures.




.topic 2750
These are local settings stored in the Windows registry and need to be set for each workstation.



Path for standard Data Files
This field shows the path of you Bookscan data files.

Monitor Ht:800
Select if you have a widescreen monitor (16:10 or 16:9)

Docket printer configuration
Almost all users can just use the Windows driver settings here. If you do wish to use Citizen or Epson OPOS drivers, you will first need to install the drivers.
Unless you have "No docket printer" selected, you will need to enter the name of the docket printer in the Printer Name field.  You can find the printer name by clicking on the [F2] button and selecting the printer from the drp down list.

Cash drawer
If there is a cash drawer attached to this workstation, you will need to select the appropriate radio button here depending on your printer.

(In Label printers quadrant)
Docket Cutter
If your docket printer has a cutter, you can activate it here.

Docket cutter command
If the default command does not work, you can enter the appropriate command code here.

Barcode Printer Configuration
Barcode printer type
Select the barcode printer type from the drop down list.
Barcode printer name
Enter the printer's name in the Barcode Printer Name field. You can find the printer name by clicking on the [F3] button and selecting the printer from the drp down list.


Carton label printer
If you wish to print carton labels from this workstation, enter the name of the carton label printer here. You can find the printer name by clicking on the Start button in Windows and selecting Printers & Faxes.

Ticket printer
If you are licensed to use the Ticketing module and wish to print tickets from this workstation, enter the name of the ticket printer here. You can find the printer name by clicking on the Start button in Windows and selecting Printers & Faxes.

EFTPOS: If you are using integrated EFTPOS, set the type EFTPOS equipment you are using. Bookscan supports Ingenico, Payment Express and Tyro.

	Note that you require a license to use this feature. Contact Barcode Solutions if you are interested in using online EFTPOS.

Tyro/Ingenico/Payment Exp path: Set the path using the browse icon to the Program folder for your integrated EFTPOS provider.

Proxy Name List:  If you use a proxy server, set the name here.

Proxy Bypass List: Set the name of the server used to bypass the proxy server here.


.topic 2760
In this window you can see the contents of the audit log.  Print a date range from it and purge old audit records.

When an operator performs a task that creates transaction, the operator code is recorded against the transaction ( e.g. an invoice or a cash sale). However not all tasks result in the creation of a transaction, for example deleting a special order or closing sales for the day. In these cases a record is created in the audit log and the date, time, operator, register and the details of the task are recorded.




If it gets too large you will be prompted to purge it for better performance any window that writes to it.  (Particularly noticed as lag between making a sale & the docket printing.)

To Purge the archive of old records, select a date at least one month in the past, then click on the Purge button.  This will mark all the records in the file up to that day as deleted.  To remove them fully run Pack Tables from the Utilities / Database Utilities menu.  This removes the deleted records and will restore the system performance.

To Print records, select a date range and then click on the Print (F9) button.

To see transactions made by a particular operator, select their code from the drop down list.  You must have Use operator IDs selected in the Sales tab of the System Options to use this.

print preview allows you to preview the report and choose whether or not you print it.

.topic 2200
You can set up security in four different ways:

Full security
The full security module allows you set  restrict access for each operator to every part of the program.
Operators must login (optionally with a password) to use the system.
The system will maintain an audit log of all operations such as record deletions and additions and price changes. This log can be viewed in the Security window (Utilities\Security).
Additionally the operators' initials are recorded against each transaction.
Contact Barcode Solutions if you wish to purchase this option.

Prompt for operator initials.
This option forces the operator to enter his ( two character) initials before using any of the sales screens.
In cash sales, the operator will need to enter his initials before each transaction.
The operator's initials are recoded against each transaction.
To turn on this option, open System Options from the main menu, select the Sales tab and set the Prompt for operator initials flag.
This option can be used in conjunction with the full security module.

Use encoded initials.
This option is a variation of the Prompt for operator initials option, adding a higher level of security.
Instead of entering  operators entering their two character initials they instead enter a three character which is set against each operator in the Operator window.
This options stops an operator from logging in using another user's initials.
To turn on this option, open System Options from the main menu, select the Sales tab and set the Prompt for operator initials flag and then the Use encoded initials flag.

Master Password
If you are not using the security module you can still password protect the System Options window. The password can be set on the Licensee tab by clicking on the Set System & Password (Alt F9) button.

Setting up Operators
Operators are set up in the Operators window. From the main menu select Utilities\Security\Operators.

Viewing the Audit log
When an operator performs a task that creates transaction, the operator code is recorded against the transaction ( e.g. an invoice or a cash sale). However not all tasks result in the creation of a transaction, for example deleting a special order or closing sales for the day. In these cases a record is created in the audit log and the date, time, operator, register and the details of the task are recorded.
You can view the audit log in the Security window. Go to the main menu and select Utilities\Security\Audit window.
In the window you can:
View all operations performed on Bookscan except transaction creation.
Select an operator from the combo box to view just that operator's actions.
Print an audit report filtered by date range (and optionally filter by operator).
Purge old audit records.

Stock adjustments
If you are using the full security module, you can restrict which operators can perform stock adjustments. Stock is adjusted up in the Receiving window by "receiving" stock against a supplier called "Stock Adjustment". Similarly stock is adjusted down by creating a "return" against the same supplier. After you have created the stock adjustment supplier (usually supplier code STK, supplier name Stock Adjustment), open the Purchasing tab in System Options and nominate that supplier  as the stock adjustment supplier by selecting it in the Stock Adjustment Supplier combo box there. Those operators without the authority to do stock adjustments will not be able to receive from or return to this supplier.

.topic 1960

Using the Security system has three major benefits. It
assists in maintaining the accuracy of your data by recording the operator initials against each transaction they create.
improves the security of your system; you can restrict user access to only those parts of the system that they need to use.
maintains an audit log of additions, deletions, globals and changes to your database.

Setting up the security system.
You can set up security in four different ways as outlined in Setting up security:

Operator access
From  main menu, click on Utilities\Security\Operators.
In the System Log in Box that opens, type in your initials and password. The Maintain Operator Data window will now open.



Adding a new operator
·	Click the Add Record (F3)  button  and enter a unique Operator ID and the operator's Name and (optionally) a Password.
If you are using the Use encoded initials option, enter a three character code in the Sign In field (not displayed if this option hasn't been set.
·	Then click Save Record (F3).

Operator system access
If you are running the full security module you can restrict an operator's access to only those parts of Bookscan that they need.
System access is set using the three list boxes in the lower half of the Operators window:

Operational groups
This list box lists the four main groupings of system access:
sales	cash sales, invoicing, approvals etc.
purchasing	all the stock control functions - receiving, returns, stock adjustments etc.
modules	stocktake, warehousing, prepack and other modules.
utilities	system options, database utilities, security etc	
Click on any of these groups to display the current users access in that area.
			
Accessible areas & operations
This list box shows the current operator's system access for the area selected in the Operational Groups list box.
Click on an area in this list box to see its definition in the field below the Operational Groups list box.

All areas & operations
This list box shows all the available areas and operations for the operational group selected in the Operational Groups list box.
Click on an area in this list box to see its definition in the field below the Operational Groups list box.

Setting up an operator's system access
Select the operator in the Operator browser
Click on operational group you wish to amend in the Operational groups list box.
All the areas in this grouping will be displayed in the All areas & operations list box and the operator's current access in the Accessible areas & operations list box.
To give access to an area, select it in the All areas & operations list box and click on the <--- button. Use the Shift and Control keys for multiple selections.
To remove access to an area select it in the Accessible areas & operations list box and click on the --- > button. Use the Shift and Control keys for multiple selections.
To save your changes click on the Save (F8) button below the Operational groups list box.
To cancel your change click on the Reload (F9) button.

Shortcuts to setting up operator access
The Operator's window provides a few shortcuts to speed up setting user access to the system:

Cloning an operator
The most useful of these shortcuts is cloning an operator's access.
Select the operator whose access you wish to set in the Operator browser.
Click on the Clone (F12) button.
A dialogue window will open with a combo box listing all operator's. Select the operator whose access you wish to copy and click on the Clone Profile (F12) button.
The first operator's accessible areas will be overwritten with the second user's access.
Note that all areas for all operational groups will be overwritten not just the visible one.

Pre-set profiles
Operator's can quickly be given one of three pre-set profiles:
Manager	Allows access to all areas of the program.
Warehouse	For wholesale setups, sets up a storeman's restricted access.
Sales basic	Sets limited access to basic sales functions.
When using pre-set profiles, the system access in the Accessible areas & operations list box will be automatically set. You can then make any changes to the access that you wish before saving the profile.

Step by step instructions to set these accesses up:
Click on either the Manager, Warehouse or Basic sales radio button.
Click on the Load Profile (F11) button.		
Note that all areas for all operational groups will be overwritten not just the visible one.
Manually make any changes you may wish to make to the operator's access.
To save your changes click on the Save (F8) button.

Pre-set area profiles
Operator's can quickly be given access using pre-set area profiles using the check boxes in the Profiles box.

In Sales and Purchasing you can set up three basic profiles:
Enquiry 	Operator can perform on enquiry functions in either sales or purchasing and cannot enter transactions or make changes.
Processing	Operator can create transactions, add and delete records and access the relevant tables but has no access to global functions.
Housekeeping	Operator has full access to either all sales or all purchasing functions.

In the Other functions you can quickly set up access to:
Modules	All the optional modules you are running.
Utilities 	System options, database utilities, pricing and security.
Tables	Database tables.	

Step by step instructions to set these accesses up
Click on the General radio button.
Check the area check boxes you require e.g. Sales Processing, Purchasing Enquiry and Modules.
Click on the Load Profile (F11) button.		
Note that all areas for all operational groups will be overwritten not just the visible one.
Manually make any changes you may wish to make to the operator's access.
To save your changes click on the Save (F8) button.

Editing operator access
Click on the user that you want to edit in the Operator's browser .
·	To amend the operator's name, just type your changes in the Name field and then click Save Record (F3).
·	To delete an operator click Delete (F4) button.
·	To change a password click Change Password (F7) button. .

.topic 205

To print Title barcodes with new prices or for damaged barcodes, on the main menu click Reports, then click Print Title Barcodes.
There is also the ability to print barcode labels for items that are on special.

Scan in the titles barcode, or type in the ISBN.



Options to use:

Price - Key in the new price if you wish to change it. (This will change the sell price field in the title master for this product)
How many to print - the quantity to print.
Use Retail Price - check box to set this
No check digit - check box to set this
Stock card -  check box to set this
Special pricing label - check box to print labels that show the sell price and the RRP  (for sale prices). The Sell price in this window needs to be changed if the same as the RRP. This change will update in the title master.  This will print on the label 'Special', 'RRP' and 'Our Price to show the difference in pricing. This is designed for a 55x50mm label.
	Use pre-printed label -  This option can only be selected if 'Special pricing label' is being used. This additional setting allows  	you to print the specials onto a label that are already pre-printed e.g. ('Special', 'RRP and 'Our Price' ) Or ( 'Sale', 'Was' and 'Now').


Click the Print(F12) button to print. Or press the F12 on your keyboard.
Once sent to print, the window will clear, ready for the next product to be scanned/keyed


When finished, click the Close

.topic 207

Through this section you can print a customer barcode, for such uses as customer member card purposes and also for carton labels for mailing.



Step 1
Open print customer labels by on the main menu click Reports, then click Print Customer Labels.
Select the customer

Step 2
Select label type:
Barcode - Customer barcode for membership cards etc
Address - Carton label for mailing

Step 3
Enter in how many to print.

Step 4
Click Print button.


.topic 209

Through this section you can print a supplier barcode, for such uses as supplier member card purposes and also for carton labels for mailing.



Step 1
Open print supplier customer labels by on the main menu click Reports, then click Print Supplier Labels.
Select the supplier customer

Step 2
Select label type:
Barcode - Supplier barcode for membership cards etc
Address - Carton label for mailing

Step 3
Enter in how many to print.

Step 4
Click Print button.


.topic 2
	Report Writer  Overview


	Report Writer extracts reports from a Bookscan or a
	PlusScan database, supplied by Barcode Solutions.


Report Writer Properties 			:  Configuring Report Writer.
Report Processing 				:  How to use Report Writer.
Report Parameters 				:  Filtering data into reports.  (Lists all.)
Modifying Inbuilt Reports 			:  Adapting predefined report formats.
Creating And Modifying Your Own Reports 	:  Developing new reports.  Mainly tips.
ReportPro Designer Help			:  Help for the built-in report designer.








Version 1.0

.topic 3
Report Writer Properties


Report Writer's properties can be view and/or modified from an entry on the File menu.

Report Writer uses the data-files stored in your Bookscan database folder.   Report Writer performs a quick test on these values each time that it is run.

Once Report Writer  finds the data, it assumes that its inbuilt report forms will be found in a sub folder called Reports.

The Properties window also contains three options pertaining to the Preview window (available immediately after reports are generated and before printing).  The first is a checkbox by which previewing can be omitted or not, as a default.  (This default can be overridden for any report which begins by opening a parameters window.  If the right mouse-button is clicked over the window, a popup menu makes it possible to switch previewing on/off as required, and the selection made will remain in force until a change is made by either the same means or through the Properties window, or through quitting Report Writer.)

You can also set a default size for the preview window, as well as a default zoom factor.

.topic 4
Report Parameters

Most of Report Writer's built-in reports can be run to reflect various subsets of the full, available data, e.g.: many reports can apply a date filter, or be run for different departments, suppliers and so forth.  These selections are the report's parameters.   They are made selectable as soon as you opt to run almost any report.   Report Writer will trap errors made in the selection process.

The available parameters vary from report to report. To learn about the particular parameters of particular reports, make a selection below:

	Customer reports
	Departmental reports
	Supplier reports
	Purchasing reports
	Sales reports
	Creditor reports
	Debtor Reports
	Title Reports
	Stocktake Reports
	Other reports


See also:	Selection Controls;  Executing ReportSCAN from the command line.


.topic 5
How Report Writer Works

As well as extending to end-users the ability to design their own reports from scratch, Report Writer contains numerous predefined reports for users of Bookscan and PlusScan software.   Users familiar with those reports should soon come to terms with the layout and operation of Report Writer.

Report Writer's reports can be redesigned, using the same tools that are available for the creation of the reports (but taking advantage of Report Writer'sfiltering mechanisms at the same time).  The main report-design tool is a package called ReportPro,  which is a standard component of Report Writer itself.

ReportPro stores report-definitions (usually called report-forms) in .rpt files which you can create, modify and run at your leisure, via Report Writer's windows.  Report Writer's other contribution to reports is to select, gather, sort and summarise data for certain report-forms which are an integral part of the system.  In designing your own reports from scratch, you have to find a way to make ReportPro perform these extra services (which are usually within its power).  When you are working within the Report Designer you will have access to ReportPro's own Help services.

When Report Writer is preparing data for one of its integral reports, it puts a picture (something like a radar-scanner) on the monitor, to keep you informed that something's happening  -  because certain reports may keep you waiting for a while.   You can kick off another report or function while Report Writer is already working on one.

See also:	Selection Controls;  Executing ReportSCAN from the command line.


.topic 141
Approvals Report:	Summary


	Purpose:
Summarise approvals file.

	Parameters:
Option to sort by either Date or Customer.


	Output:
Sort-group key and subkey plus subtotal counts for Quantity and Extended Price.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
		ReportTitle 	-	Reflects the selection.


See also:	Selection Controls.



.topic 142




Approvals Report:	14 Or More Days Unfilled


	Purpose:
Report all approvals older than a nominated date (defaults to 14 days).

	Parameters:
Cutoff date, option to omit approvals which have been filled.


	Output:
ISBN, Title, Quantities, Prices, Approval-date, Days outstanding, Customer name and phone.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
		ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection.



See also:	Selection Controls.


.topic 139
Approvals Report:	All


	Purpose:
Report all approvals for all customers.

	Parameters:
Option to omit approvals which have been filled.


	Output:
ISBN, Title, Quantities, Prices, Approval-date, Days outstanding, Customer name and phone.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
		ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection.



See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 140
Approvals Report:	Customer


	Purpose:
Report all approvals for nominated customer(s).

	Parameters:
Customer(s), option to omit approvals which have been filled.


	Output:
ISBN, Title, Quantities, Prices, Approval-date, Days outstanding, Customer name and phone.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
		ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection.



See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 164
Approvals Report:	Returns Receipt


	Purpose:
This report cannot be run by Report Writer  -  only modified.   Bookscan prints it.

	Parameters:
Established by Bookscan.

	Output:
Title, Author, Unit Price, Number returned, Number outstanding.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	       ReportTitle (varies according to the name of the customer).

.topic 157
Approvals Report:	Reprint


	Purpose:
Reprint a nominated approval.

	Parameters:
Approval number.


	Output:
Approval text, listing ISBN, Title, Author, Qty, Cost and Extended Cost, with totals.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
		None.

.topic 84
Academic Report:		Booklists


	Purpose:
	         List text-books applying to a semester of (your selection of) courses.

	Parameters:
Courses, option to omit Dropped texts,  Year,  Semester.

	Output:
Title, Author, Cost, Edition, Text/Recommended flag.
	         New page per Course.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        None.


See also:	Selection Controls.


.topic 80
Academic Report:		Courses


	Purpose:
Detail the courses defined for the academic subsystem.

	Parameters:
None.

	Output:
Course code & name, co-ordinator & phone, enrollment figures, last-order date.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        None.

.topic 83
Academic Report:		Department


	Purpose:
List  courses and their texts for nominated departments.

	Parameters:
Department(s) and include/exclude: Dropped, YTD/Stock data and second-hand price column.

	Output:
Author, Title, Edition, Text/Rec; Cost and (optionally) YTD, On-hand and On-order figures.
	        Grouped by course within department.

 	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        lSecondHand	-	Determines whether a column is used for 2nd-hand costings.
	        lWithYTD		-	Determines whether or not the YTD and Stock data is included.

See also:	Selection Controls .

.topic 82
Academic Report:		Lecturers


	Purpose:
	         List the lecturers for (your selection of) courses.

	Parameters:
Courses.

	Output:
Lecturer, Telephone-number.
	        Grouped by course.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        None.


See also:	Selection Controls .

.topic 81
Academic Report:		Texts


	Purpose:
List text-book requirements applying to (your selection of) courses.

	Parameters:
Courses, option to omit Dropped texts, optional Page-breaks per course, Year.

	Output:
Title, Author, Pricings, Semester, Lecturer, suggested quantity.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        lPageBreaks.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 92
Creditor Reports


	Select a report below, to view details of selection-options, purpose, output and variables:

	
	Trial Balance				-	Review periodic payment balances.
	All					-	Review all creditor transactions.
	Journals				-	Review credit and debit journals.
	Payments				-	Review creditor payments.
	Purchases				-	Review creditor purchases.
	Due Report				-	Check out what credit is due.
	Cash Requirement			-	Reports what creditors' cash requirements are.

.topic 96
Creditor Report:			All


	Purpose:
	        View all creditor transactions within a nominated period.

	Parameters:
	         Option to restrict transactions to those within the current period.

	Output:
	         Creditor ID and Name, Transaction identifiers  and  Amount.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.



See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 109
Creditor Report:			Cash Requirement


	Purpose:
	        Review creditors' cash requirements with regard to nominated date and currencies.

	Parameters:
	         Due date, Currencies to be included.

	Output:
	         Requirements in 30-day increments, by creditor and in currency-summary.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.
	        HomeCurrency	-	The code for the local currency.
	        ShowHome		-	Controls whether  the report prints currency conversions.
	        cRatesUsed	-	Informs report's second section of  conversion rates.
	
See also:	Selection Controls.





.topic 108
Creditor Report:			Due Report


	Purpose:
	        View all credit due to a nominated date.

	Parameters:
	         Due date, Currencies to be included.

	Output:
	         Key Dates, Invoice-number, Amount and home-currency amount (if applic).

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.
	        HomeCurrency		-	The code for the local currency.
	        ShowHome		-	Controls whether  the report prints currency conversions.

See also:	Selection Controls.



.topic 97
Creditor Report:			Journals


	Purpose:
	        View all creditor (credit and debit) journals within a nominated period.

	Parameters:
	         Option to restrict transactions to those within the current period.

	Output:
	         Creditor ID and Name, Transaction identifiers  and  Amount.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.



See also:	Selection Controls

.topic 98
Creditor Report:			Payments


	Purpose:
	        View all creditor payment transactions within a nominated period.

	Parameters:
	         Option to restrict transactions to those within the current period.

	Output:
	         Creditor ID and Name, Transaction identifiers  and  Amount.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.



See also:	Selection Controls

.topic 99
Creditor Report:			Purchases


	Purpose:
	        View all creditor purchase transactions within a nominated period.

	Parameters:
	         Option to restrict transactions to those within the current period.

	Output:
	         Creditor ID and Name, Transaction identifiers  and  Amount.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.



See also:	Selection Controls

.topic 93
Creditor Report:			Trial Balance


	Purpose:
	         Review current, 30-day, 60-day and 90-day creditor balances.

	Parameters:
Currencies to include, option to include Zero-balance creditors, Local suppliers only, Summary output option.

	Output:
Creditor detail (unless in summary, which reports only currency totals), periodic balances, YTD.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.
                        MultiCurrency	-	Controls printing of report's third section.
	        Summary		-	Controls format of report's first section.
	        SuppTot		-	Total balance for third section of report.
	        Op_Bal		-	Opening balance (for third section of report).

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 11
Customer Reports

	Select a report below, to view details of selection-options, purpose, output and variables:


	Individual		-	Reports purchases for a single customer.
	All			-	Reports purchases for all customers.
	Best Customers 	-	Comparative listing of customers (by quantity of purchases).
	Most Profitable    	-	Comparative listing of customers (by profitability of purchases).
	Quantity / Cost 	-	Reports the quantity/cost of selected purchases.
	Mail Out		_	Create a customer listing, mailing labels or a merge file.	

.topic 18
Customer Report: 		All


	Purpose:
A report of purchases covering all customers.


	Parameters:
Any number of categories may be included unless the "All Customers" radio-button is pressed.
Start and finish dates.


	Output:
Title, Author, Department, Purchase-Date, Sale Price, Discount Amount, Quantity, Discounted Price.
Subtotalled by customer or by category (depending on the relevant parameter).

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 19
Customer Report: 		Best Customers


	Purpose:
Comparative listing of best customers in quantitative terms.
		

	Parameters:
Any number of categories may be included unless the "All Customers" radio-button is pressed.
Cutoff value (to limit extent of "bestness" reported).
Start and finish dates.

	Output:
Customer name, Customer key, Total Sales, Discount Amount, Quantity, YTD Sales, Profit.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.


See also:	Selection Controls

.topic 17
Customer Report: 		Individual


	Purpose:
Report purchases for a selected customer.


	Parameters:
Particular customer.
Start and finish dates.


	Output:
Title, Author, Department, Purchase-Date, Sale Price, Discount Amount, Quantity, Discounted Price.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
		ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 20
Customer Report:		Most Profitable


	Purpose:
Comparative listing of most profitable customers.


	Parameters:
Any number of categories may be included unless the "All Customers" radio-button is pressed.
Minimum profit for inclusion.
Start and finish dates.

	Output:
Customer name, Customer key, Total Sales, Discount Amount, Quantity, YTD Sales, Profit.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 138
Customer Reports:		Quantity / Cost


	Purpose:
Report the quantity/cost of purchases for selected customer(s).

	Parameters:
Customer(s),  Start and finish dates, Sort-order.


	Output:
Product, Description, Quantity, Cost.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
		ReportTitle 		-	reflects the selection parameters.
	            Subtitle		-	expresses the nominated sort-order.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 94



Debtor Reports



	Select a report below, to view details of selection-options, purpose, output and variables:

	
	Trial Balance				-	Review periodic payment balances.
	All					-	Review all debtor transactions.
	Journals				-	Review credit and debit journals.
	Payments				-	Review debtor payments.
	Sales					-	Review debtor sales.
	Commission				-	Review salesman commissions.
	Banking List				-	Print the banking list.
	Master List				-	Produce the master list of debtors.
	Tax Totals				-	Report sales tax totals.

.topic 100
Debtor Report:			All Transactions


	Purpose:
	        View all debtor transactions within a nominated period.

	Parameters:
	         Option to restrict transactions to those within the current period.

	Output:
	         Debtor ID and Name, Transaction identifiers, Sundries, Sales-tax, Freight  and  Amount.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.




See also:	Selection Controls, Sales-Tax.


.topic 105
Debtor Report:			Banking List


	Purpose:
	        Print the list of cash and cheque banking arrangements.

	Parameters:
	         Start and Finish dates.

	Output:
	         Debtor-code, Date, Trans-No; Cash & Cheque Amounts and cheque Details.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle	-	reflects selection criteria.




See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 104
Debtor Report:			Commissions


	Purpose:
	        View salesman commissions within a nominated period.

	Parameters:
	         Start and finish dates.

	Output:
	         Date, Invoice-number, Customer ID/Name, Amount and Sales-tax.   Grouped by Salesman.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.




See also:	Selection Controls



.topic 101
Debtor Report:			Journals


	Purpose:
	        View all debtor journals (debit and credit) within a nominated period.

	Parameters:
	         Option to restrict transactions to those within the current period.

	Output:
	         Debtor ID and Name, Transaction identifiers, Sundries, Sales-tax, Freight  and  Amount.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.




See also:	Selection Controls .

.topic 106
Debtor Report:			Master List


	Purpose:
	        Print the master list of debtors.

	Parameters:
	        Option to sort by salesman.

	Output:
	        Debtor Key, Name, Contact, Address and Phone.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle  	-	Reflects selection criteria.
	        SalesSort		-	Controls appearance of subgroupings.



See also:	Selection Controls.



.topic 102
Debtor Report:			Payments


	Purpose:
	        View all debtor payments within a nominated period.

	Parameters:
	         Option to restrict transactions to those within the current period.

	Output:
	         Debtor ID and Name, Transaction identifiers, Sundries, Sales-tax, Freight  and  Amount.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.




See also:	Selection Controls

.topic 103
Debtor Report:			Sales


	Purpose:
	        View all debtor sales within a nominated period.

	Parameters:
	         Option to restrict transactions to those within the current period.

	Output:
	         Debtor ID and Name, Transaction identifiers, Sundries, Sales-tax, Freight  and  Amount.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.




See also:	Selection Controls



.topic 107
Debtor Report:			Tax Totals

	
	Purpose:
	        Report the sales tax totals.

	Parameters:
	        Option to report current period only.

	Output:
	        Customer Name, Invoice-number, Transaction-date, Invoice-amount and Sales tax amount.  Totals.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle	-	Reflects selection criteria.
	



See also:	Selection Controls



.topic 95
Debtor Report:			Trial Balance


	Purpose:
	         Review current, 30-day, 60-day and 90-day debtor balances.

	Parameters:
Option to include Zero-balance debtors, Summary output option.

	Output:
Debtor detail (unless in summary, which reports only currency totals), periodic balances, YTD.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle		-	Reflects selection criteria.
                        MultiCurrency	-	Controls printing of report's third section.
	        Summary		-	Controls format of report's first section.
	        SuppTot		-	Total balance for third section of report.
	        Op_Bal		-	Opening balance (for third section of report).

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 12
Departmental Reports

	Select a report below, to view details of selection-options, purpose, output and variables:


	Purchases		-	Reports purchases by department.
	Sales			-	Sales by department.
	Movements:
		Detailed 	-	Stock movement by department.
		Summarised	-	Stock movement by department (summary).
	Weekly 		-	Comparative weekly sales.
	Year-to-date Sales	-	Comparative YTD sales.

.topic 24
Department Report:  		Stock Movement Details


	Purpose:
Detail stock movements by department and movement type.

	Parameters:
None

	Output:
Stock movement type, 12 columns of monthly totals plus a totalling column.
Subtotalled by movement type.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary	-	determines the level of detail reported.
cType	- 	determines what sort of transactions the report will display.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 25
Department Report:  		Stock Movement Summary


	Purpose:
Summarise stock movements by department and movement type.

	Parameters:
None

	Output:
Stock movement type, 12 columns of monthly totals plus a totalling column.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary	-	determines the level of detail reported.
cType	- 	determines what sort of transactions the report will display.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 23
Department Report:  		Sales


	Purpose:
Group sales by department (by month).

	Parameters:
None

	Output:
Stock movement type, 12 columns of monthly totals plus a totalling column.
Subtotalled by department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary	-	determines the level of detail reported.
cType	- 	determines what sort of transactions the report will display.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 26
Department Report:  		Weekly


	Purpose:
Compare up to nineteen weeks of sales by department (across current and prior year).

	Parameters:
Starting week.

	Output:
Department name, 19 columns -  each reflecting one week of sales.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.
StartWeek	-	determines how columns are labelled.
cLastYear	-	first year of the comparison.
cThisYear	-	second year of the comparison.
lByDept	-	indicates whether the report is being run by Department.   It can also be run "by Supplier".


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 22
Departmental Report:  	Purchases


	Purpose:
Group purchases by department (by month).

	Parameters:
None

	Output:
Stock movement type, 12 columns of monthly totals plus a totalling column.
Subtotalled by department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary	-	determines the level of detail reported.
cType	- 	determines what sort of transactions the report will display.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 27
Department Report:  		Year-To-Date Sales


	Purpose:
Compare sales and costs by department in two years.

	Parameters:
Year 1, Year 2 and ISO Week (up to which to report).

	Output:
Department name, columns for each year's Sales, Costs and ratios.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.
cYear1	-	first year of the comparison.
cYear2	-	second year of the comparison.
lByDept	-	indicates whether the report is being run by Department.   It can also be run "by Supplier".


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 16
Other Reports

	Select a report to view details of selection-options, purpose, output and variables:

	Single-table Lists:
		Category	-	Lists database's Categories.
		Suppliers	-	Lists database's Suppliers.
		Department	-	Lists database's Departments.
		Location	-	Lists database's Locations.
		Imprint		-	Lists database's Imprints
		Customers	-	Lists database's Customers.
		Promotions	-	Lists current Promotions.
	Promotion Titles	-	Lists the titles in a nominated promotion.
	Academic
		Courses	-	Details the courses defined for academic facilities.
		Texts		-	Lists the book requirements for each (nominated) course.
		Lecturer	-	List lecturers for nominated course(s).
		Department	-	List courses/texts for nominated department(s).
		Booklists	-	List a semester's books for the nominated course(s).
	Pre-pack
		Codes		-	Listing of booklists.
		Items		-	Listing of items comprising a nominated booklist.
		Publish		-	Listing of a school's booklist,  by nominated supplier(s).
		Totals		-	Listing of total booklist sales.
		Booklist Totals  -	Listing of picking requirements for nominated booklist.
		School		-	Listing of students.
		Back-orders	-	Listing of back-orders

.topic 162
Other Reports:			Promo Titles


	Purpose:
List the titles in a nominated promotion.

	Parameters:
Promotion, Sort-order preference.

	Output:
	         NOID, Code, Title, Author, Supplier, Department, promotional and normal Cost/Sells, Onhand, Margin, New flag.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle	-	shows the selected promotion.

.topic 89
Pre-pack Report:		Booklist Totals


	Purpose:
	         Lists total picking requirements for nominated booklist.

	Parameters:
Booklist.

	Output:
Sequence-number, Title, Ordering & Purchasing quantities, Shortfall.
	

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        cBooklist.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 85
Pre-pack Report:		Codes


	Purpose:
	         Provide a listing of booklists.

	Parameters:
None.

	Output:
Code, Name, Date last ordered.
	

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        None.

.topic 86
Pre-pack Report:		Items


	Purpose:
	         Lists items comprising the nominated booklist.

	Parameters:
Booklist.

	Output:
Sequence no; Title, Imprint, Subject and Pricing information.
	

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        cBLCode	-	The code of the nominated booklist.


See also:	Selection Controls.


.topic 87
Pre-pack Report:		Publish


	Purpose:
	         Lists a nominated school's booklist, by nominated supplier(s).

	Parameters:
School, Supplier(s).

	Output:
Supplier, ISBN, Title, Imprint and Pricing information.
	

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        cSchoolName	-	Name of the nominated school.


See also:	Selection Controls.


.topic 90
Pre-pack Report:		School


	Purpose:
	         Lists students for nominated (or all) booklist(s).

	Parameters:
Booklist/All.

	Output:
Date received, Student Name/Address/Phone, Comments, Booklist, Student-Type, Student-Tag.
	

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle	-	Reflects selection criteria.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 88
Pre-pack Report:		Totals


	Purpose:
	         Lists total booklist sales.

	Parameters:
None.

	Output:
Income and Commission information.
	

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        None.

.topic 91
Pre-pack Report:		Back-orders


	Purpose:
	         Lists students who have paid for a title not yet received.

	Parameters:
Booklist, Sequence-number .

	Output:
Student Name, Ordering amounts.
	

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle	-	Reflects selection criteria.
                        TitleExtra		-	Reflects selection criteria.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 14
Purchasing Reports

	Select a report below, to view details of selection-options, purpose, output and variables:


	Supplier Draft POs			-	Reports all Draft POs for nominated supplier(s).
	Final
		PO Number			-	Print nominated purchase order.
		All				-	Reports all purchase orders.
		Supplier			-	Outstanding POs with nominated supplier.
		Back Orders			-	All back orders.
		Back Orders per Supplier	-	All back orders with nominated supplier.
		PO Slips			-	Used by Bookscan (Report Writer can modify it).
		Promotions (promotions module must be enabled)
			PO Number		-	Print nominated promotional purchase order.
			All			-	Reports all promotional purchase orders.
			Supplier		-	Outstanding promo POs with nominated supplier.
			Back Orders		-	All promotional back orders.
			B-Orders per Supplier	-	All promotional back orders with nominated supplier.
			
	Returns
		Draft				-	Print (nominated) draft credit claims.
		Credit Claim			-	Reprint a credit claim.
		All Credit Claims		-	All within a specified date-range.	
		Reprint Returns Authorisation	-	Wholesalers' RA report.
	Goods Received History		-	Goods received history between chosen dates.
	Reprint GRN(s)				-	Print GRNs for unposted goods.
	Transfers
		Reprint 				-	Reprint  nominated transfer-number.
		Out				-	List outbound transfers between chosen dates.
		In				-	List inbound transfers between chosen dates.

.topic 35
Purchasing Report:		All


	Purpose:
Group purchase-order information by PO-number and supplier.
  	        Or does the same for Promotional orders.

	Parameters:
Summary format (checkbox)
Cutoff Date

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Order Date, Order Quantity, Purchase Order Comments.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary		-	determines the level of detail reported.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 160
Purchasing Reports:			All Credit Claims


	Purpose:
Reprint a chronological range of credit claims.

	Parameters:
Date-range values, Option to use summary format.

	Output:
Claim No and Date, ISBN, Title, Author, Qty Returned,  Return costs, RRPs and GST.
                        Subtotalled by Credit Claim No and Supplier.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle	-	Reflects the selection parameters.	
	        lSummarise  	-	Determines level of output detail.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 38
Purchasing Report:		Back Order/Supplier


	Purpose:
Report back-order information for nominated supplier.
  	        Or does the same for Promotional orders.

	Parameters:
Supplier.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Order Date, Back-order Date, Qty Ordered, Qty Back-ordered,  Invoice costs & RRPs.
Subtotalled by supplier.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary		-	determines the level of detail reported.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 37
Purchasing Report:		Back Orders


	Purpose:
Group back-order information by supplier.
  	        Or does the same for Promotional orders.

	Parameters:
None.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Order Date, Back-order Date, Qty Ordered, Qty Back-ordered,  Invoice costs & RRPs.
Subtotalled by supplier.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary		-	determines the level of detail reported.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 74
Purchasing Report:		Credit Claim


	Purpose:
Reprint credit claims.

	Parameters:
Credit claim number.

	Output:
ISBN, Title,  Qty Returned,  Invoice number, Invoice date, Invoice costs & RRPs.
Totals within claim (including freight).

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
Licensee's address  	-	a number of variables contribute to this.
ClaimNo			- 	the credit claim number.
	        SuppAccount		- 	the supplier's account number.	

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 72
Purchasing Report:		Draft Returns


	Purpose:
Print draft return requests.

	Parameters:
Specific supplier  (else reports across all), include/exclude Holds, include/exclude Authorisation Requests.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Order Date, Back-order Date, Qty Ordered, Qty Back-ordered,  Invoice costs & RRPs.
Subtotalled by supplier.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary		-	determines the level of detail reported.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 75
Purchasing Report:		Goods Received History


	Purpose:
Report goods received (with variance between GRN and Invoice amounts) in a date-range.

	Parameters:
Date-range.

	Output:
Date received, supplier, GRN amount, Invoiced amount, Variance.
Subtotals by supplier.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
Report Title	  	-	expresses the date-range spanned by the report.

	

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 145
Purchasing Report:		PO Number
					Command-line execution enabled.				
	Purpose:
Produce nominated  purchase order.  Or does the same for Promotional orders.

	Parameters:
PO Number, option to omit preview.

	Command-line Parameters:	
	        /PUR_NUM    /<WantPreview>    /<PO Number>

	PUR_NUM		-	Identifies the report to be run.
	WantPreview		-	/Y gives a preview, /N avoids it, /? will let the user choose.
	PO Number         	-	The number of the purchase order to be reported.

	Output:
PO header info plus ISBN,  Qty, Title, Author, Binding per book.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
PONumber	-	The selected Purchase Order number.
	        POInstruct		-	Instructions attached to the order.


See also:	Selection Controls, Executing Report Writer From The Command Line.

.topic 155
Purchasing Report:		PO Slips


	Purpose:
This report cannot be run by Report Writer  -  only modified.   Bookscan prints it.

	Parameters:
Established by Bookscan.

	Output:
ISBN, Title & Author.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	       Various licensee details.

.topic 124
Purchasing Reports:		Supplier Draft POs
					Command-line execution enabled.

	Purpose:
View draft purchase orders for nominated supplier(s).

	Parameters:
Supplier(s).

	Command-line Parameters:	
	        /DRAFT_PO    /<WantPreview>    /<SupplierCode> /<SupplierName>
	DRAFT_PO		-	Identifies the report to be run.
	WantPreview		-	/Y gives a preview, /N avoids it, /? will let the user choose.
	SupplierCode 	-	The supplier code.  Selection will be made available, if omitted.
					"ALL" (no quotes), as <Supplier> reports all Draft POs on file.
	SupplierName	-	The full name of the supplier.

	Output:
ISBN,  Author,Title, Dept; Order Date, Order Quantity, On-hand, On-order, Last order figures.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle	-	Fixed as "Draft Purchase Order Listing".



See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 153
Purchasing Report:		Reprint GRN(s)


	Purpose:
Prints goods received notes, for goods which have not yet been posted into stock.

	Parameters:
Supplier(s).

	Output (subject to system settings):
ISBN, Title, Qty, PO#, Inv Cost, Sell Price, Discount and tax components.
	        Subtotals are by supplier and invoice-number.
	        Section 2 reports Titles Not Supplied / Unfilled Special Orders.
	        Section 3 prints requisition slips.
	        Section 4 prints special order slips.
	        Section 5 prints (special order) letters to customers.
	        Author, Binding and more can be readily added  (see Modifying System Reports).

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
cTaxName	  	-	GST or VAT (used in column-labelling).
	         Also, various flags determining which sections of the report may be omitted.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 154
Purchasing Report:		Returns Authorisation


	Purpose:
Wholesaler's report, reprinting a returns authorisation for a nominated customer.

	Parameters:
Customer.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Inv #, Inv Date, Inv Cost, Return Qty, Extended Inv. Cost.
	        Wholesaler details can be readily added to header (see Modifying System Reports).

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	       Various licensee details.
	       RANo	-	the Returns Authorisation number.

See also:	Selection Controls.


.topic 36
Purchasing Report:		Supplier


	Purpose:
Report outstanding purchase orders with nominated supplier.
  	        Or does the same for Promotional orders.

	Parameters:
Supplier.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Order Date, Order Quantity, Last Invoice Costs, RRP and Sell Price, PO Comments.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary		-	determines the level of detail reported.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 76
Purchasing Report:		Transfer Reprint
					Command-line execution enabled.

	Purpose:
Reprint information for a nominated transfer-number.

	Parameters:
Transfer-number.  Option to bypass the print-preview.

	Command-line Parameters:	
	        /TRA_REP    /<WantPreview>    /<TransferNo>

	TRA_REP	-	Identifies the report to be run.
	WantPreview	-	/Y gives a preview, /N avoids it, /? will let the user choose.
	TransferNo	-	Identifying number of the transfer to be reprinted.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Date, Quantity transferred, To location, From location, Costing.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        nReportClass	  	-	The type of report being run.
nTransferNo	  	-	The number of the transfer being reprinted.
	
See also:	Selection Controls;  Executing Report Writer From The Command Line.

.topic 78
Purchasing Report:		Transfers In


	Purpose:
List incoming transfers within a nominated date-range.

	Parameters:
Start and finish dates.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Date, Quantity transferred, To location, From location, Costing.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
nReportClass	  	-	The type of report being run.
	        dStart and dFinish		-	The date-range values.
	

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 77
Purchasing Report:		Transfers Out


	Purpose:
List outgoing transfers within a nominated date-range.

	Parameters:
Start and finish dates.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Date, Quantity transferred, To location, From location, Costing.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
nReportClass	  	-	The type of report being run.
	        dStart and dFinish		-	The date-range values.
	

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 15
Sales Reports

	Select a report below, to view details of selection-options, purpose, output and variables:


	Special:
		Customer:
			All		-	Report all special orders for a nominated customer.
			Single	-	Report status of a specific special order.
			Category	-	Special Orders for customers in nominated category.
			Status 	-	Customer's special orders of nominated status.
		All			-	Review the entire Special Orders file.
		Not Found		-	Report Special Order Titles not found.
		Overdue		-	Report on Special Orders not yet filled.
	Daily:
		Graph		-	Graphs the current day's sales over time.
		Cash Book		-	Daily cash book listing.
		All Sales		-	Reports all titles sold today.
		X Report		-	Summarises day's takings.
	Monthly:
		Title Quantities Sold	-	Reports sales' quantities.
		Nett Sales		-	Nett sales figures.
		Commission		-	Monthly salesman commission report.
	History:
		Graph		-	Graphical view of global sales.
		Cash Book		-	Global cash book.
		All Sales		-	Reports all titles sold globally.
		Dept. Levy		-	Levies by department (optionally consolidated).
	Year To Date			-	YTD sales.
	Period			-	All sales in period.
	Category:
		Single Category	-	Detail sales made within a (nominated) category.
		Multiple Categories	-	Compare sales across multiple categories.
	Layby:
		All			-	Outputs entire layby file.
		Overdue		-	Laybys approaching redemption.
		Payments		-	Outstanding layby payments.
	Approvals:
		All			-	Report entire contents of the approvals file.
		Summary		-	Summarise approvals.
		14 Days		-	Report approvals unfilled for specified period.
		Customer		-	Report all approvals for nominated customer(s).
		Reprint Approval	-	Reprint a single approval.
		Apprvl. Return Receipt   -	Used by Bookscan (Report Writer can modify it).
	Reprint Invoice/Credit		-	Print (a range of) invoice(s) already posted.
	Reprint Quotation		-	Reprint quotations by either number or customer.
	Department			-	Reports taking by any combination of departments.
	Imprint			-	Sales by imprint by period.
	Best Sellers			-	Best movers' listing.
	Marketing			-	Marketing details.
	Supplier			-	Sales by supplier by period.
	Lifetime			-	Lifetime sales.
	Operator Sales		-	Cash sales by operator (if option system-enabled).
	Vouchers			-	All or outstanding vouchers report.

.topic 131
Sales Report:	All Special Orders (Customer)
			Command-line execution enabled.
	
	Purpose:
Report all special orders outstanding for a nominated customer.

	Parameters:
Customer, option to include/exclude filled orders.

	Command-line Parameters:	
	        /SAL_SCA    /<WantPreview>    /<CustomerCode>  /<ExcludeSupplied>

	SAL_SCA		-	Identifies the report to be run.
	WantPreview		-	/Y gives a preview, /N avoids it, /? will let the user choose.
	CustomerCode	-	Code for the customer whose special orders are to be printed.
	ExcludeSupplied	-	/Y excludes orders which have been supplied, else use /N.
	
	Output:
Letterhead, Order-date, Title, Author, Quantity outstanding, Comments.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
Licensee	 	-	Name and all variables starting with "L_" (address data).


See also:	Selection Controls,   Executing Report Writer From The Command Line


.topic 132
Sales Report:	Special Order
			Command-line execution enabled.
	
	Purpose:
Report the status of a specific special order.

	Parameters:
Order-number, option to include/exclude filled orders.

	Command-line Parameters:	
	        /SAL_SOO    /<WantPreview>    /<OrderNo>  /<ExcludeSupplied>

	SAL_SOO		-	Identifies the report to be run.
	WantPreview		-	/Y gives a preview, /N avoids it, /? will let the user choose.
	OrderNo		-	Number identifying the special order to be printed.
	ExcludeSupplied	-	/Y excludes orders which have been supplied, else use /N.
	
	Output:
Letterhead, Order-date, Title, Author, Quantity outstanding, Comments.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
Licensee	 	-	Name and all variables starting with "L_" (address data).
	

See also:	Selection Controls,   Executing Report Writer From The Command Line




.topic 137
Sales Report:	Overdue Special Orders


	Purpose:
 Report special orders yet to be filled.

	Parameters:
Start and Finish dates, Supplier(s), option to include, exclude or report-only standing orders.

	Output:
 Title, ISBN, Qty & Date ordered, Special & Master comments, Customer (& suburb), Status.
Grouped by Supplier.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle	-	Reflects the selection-parameters.

See also:	Selection Controls




.topic 133



Sales Report:	Special Order By Customer Category


	Purpose:
Report the status of special orders for customers in a nominated category.

	Parameters:
Category, option to include/exclude filled orders.

	Output:
Letterhead, Order-date, Title, Author, Quantity outstanding, Comments.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
Licensee	 	-	Name and all variables starting with "L_" (address data).
	

See also:	Selection Controls


.topic 134



Sales Report:	Special Order Status By Customer


	Purpose:
Report special orders with a nominated status for customers in a nominated category.

	Parameters:
Customer, Status, option to include/exclude filled orders.

	Output:
 Letterhead, ISBN, Title, Quantity,  Order-date,  Comments.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
Licensee	 	-	Name.   Plus all variables starting with "L_" (address data).
	

See also:	Selection Controls


.topic 136
Sales Report:	Special Orders Not Found


	Purpose:
Report special order title not found.

	Parameters:
None.

	Output:
Order No; Title & Author sought, Supplier, Comments,  Order-date,  Customer.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        None.

.topic 135
Sales Report:	All Special Orders


	Purpose:
Report all special orders on file (with an optional starting-number).

	Parameters:
Starting (order) number, option to include/exclude filled orders, sort-option.

	Output:
Title, Comments,  Order-date,  Qty ordered, received & delivered, Status, OrderNo; Master comments.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle	-	Reflects the selection criteria.
	        lWithSubTotals	-	Determines if Customer subtotals will be printed.

See also:	Selection Controls


.topic 46
Sales Report:	Global Cash Book


	Purpose:
Report cash book over global data.

	Parameters:
Start and finish dates, Summary option, option to print Banking list.

	Output:
Date, Customer ID, Tender-type, Netts, Discount, Time-stamp, Register, Tax and Operator.
Subtotalled by transaction type and tender type.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary		-	determines the level of detail reported.
WithBankList	-	dictates if second section of report should be printed.
NumInvs		-	informs section 2 of total number of invoiced payments.
NumCNs		-	informs section 2 of total number of invoices and credit notes.
NumCash	-	informs section 2 of total number of sales.

See also:	Selection Controls

.topic 40
Sales Report:	All Daily Sales


	Purpose:
Detail the current day's sales.

	Parameters:
Sort-order, Summary option and (suppliers only) option to print only one line per ISBN.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Sale Qty, On-hand, Sale Price, Cost Price, Discount levels, Operator and Time details
Subtotalled either by supplier or by department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary		-	determines the level of detail reported.
ByDept		-	determines sort-order.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 123
Sales Report:	Daily Cash Book


	Purpose:
Report cash book at the end of the day's business..

	Parameters:
 Summary option, option to include Banking List.

	Output:
Date, Customer ID, Tender-type, Netts, Discount, Time-stamp, Register, Tax and Operator.
Subtotalled by transaction type and tender type.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary		-	determines the level of detail reported.
WithBankList	-	dictates if second section of report should be printed.
NumInvs		-	informs section 2 of total number of invoiced payments.
NumCNs		-	informs section 2 of total number of invoices and credit notes.
NumCash	-	informs section 2 of total number of sales.

See also:	Selection Controls

.topic 39
Sales Report:	Graph Of  Daily Sales


	Purpose:
A graphical view of the day's sales over time.

	Parameters:
A checkbox to include or exclude Invoices from the figures generated.

	Output:
Solid bar-graph.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
Average 		-	average sales per unit time.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 165
Sales Report:	X Report


	Purpose:
A summary of takings, broken down by Tender Type.

	Parameters:
None.

	Output:
Sale Qty, Sale Price, GST Amount
Subtotalled by Tender Type and (if nominated in system settings) by Register.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	         Standard ones only.

.topic 49
Sales Report:	All Laybys


	Purpose:
	        Report all layby transactions.

	Parameters:
None.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Quantity, Pricing, Layby Date, Days Outstanding, Customer Name and Phone No.
Subtotals by layby number.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the report's purpose.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 51
Sales Report:	Layby Payments


	Purpose:
Report all layby payments.

	Parameters:
None.

	Output:
Layby Number, Customer ID, Layby Value, Paid-to-date, Outstanding.
Subtotals by layby number.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the report's purpose.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 50
Sales Report:	Overdue Laybys


	Purpose:
Report all laybys approaching redemption.

	Parameters:
Cutoff Date.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Quantity, Pricing, Layby Date, Days Outstanding, Customer Name and Phone No.
Subtotals by layby number.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the report's purpose.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 130
Sales Report:	Multiple Categories


	Purpose:
Compare sales totals across multiple categories (uses title's first category).

	Parameters:
Categories, date-range, option to sort by quantity or profit.

	Output:
Category, Quantity, Nett Sales, Nett Cost, Gross Profit.
Sorted by quantity or profit.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle	-	reflects the selection parameters.
	        SubTitle		-	Expresses sort-criterion.

See also:	Selection Controls, .

.topic 129
Sales Report:	Single Category


	Purpose:
Review sales details within a nominated category (uses title's first category).

	Parameters:
Category, date-range.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Quantity, Cost-of-sales, Nett, RRP, On-hand, Profit.
Sorted by sales quantity.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle	-	reflects the selection parameters.
	        Subtitle		-	full name of the selected category.

See also:	Selection Controls,

.topic 45
Sales Report:	All History


	Purpose:
Detail global sales.

	Parameters:
Start and finish dates, Sort-order, Consolidation option,
Summary option, option to print only one line per ISBN.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Unit Price,  Discount levels, Nett, Cost, Time-stamp and Operator details.
Subtotalled by either supplier or department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary		-	determines the level of detail reported.
ByDept		-	determines sort-order.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 159
Sales Report:	Department Levy

	Purpose:
Reports levies by department and, optionally, by consolidated department.

	Parameters:
Start and finish dates,  Consolidation option,

	Output:
Qty, Discount, Nett Sale and Cost Price (ex GST), Dollar and Percentage GP.
Subtotalled by department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  	-	reflects the the report's date parameters.
lConsolidate	-	determines subtotalling style.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 44
Sales Report:	Global Sales History Graph


	Purpose:
A graphical view of global sales.

	Parameters:
Start and finish dates plus a checkbox to include or exclude Invoices from the figures generated.

	Output:
Solid bar-graph.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
Average 		-	average sales per unit time.
TotVal		-	informs report of  average sale value,.
TotQty		-	informs report of average quantity sold.
cScale		-	x-axis scaling factor.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 48
Sales Report:	Period Sales


	Purpose:
Report sales within a given period.

	Parameters:
Cutoff quantity and Period for reporting.

	Output:
Title, Author,  On-hand, Last Sale-date, 12 columns of period sales quantities plus one totalling column.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Cutoff		-	the minimum level of sales reportable.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 47
Sales Report:	Year-To-Date


	Purpose:
Detail YTD sales.

	Parameters:
Sort-order, Cutoff and any  array of  departments.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author,  On-hand, Last Sale-date, 12 columns of monthly sales quantities plus one totalling column.
Subtotalled by either supplier or department.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  	-	reflects the selection parameters.
Cutoff		-	the minimum level of sales reportable.
SortOrder		-	determines sort-order.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 43
Sales Report:	Salesman Commission


	Purpose:
Shows performance of salespeople.

	Parameters:
Period for reporting.

	Output:
Sale Date, Title, Quantity, List Price, Discount,  Value and Tax.
Subtotalled by salesman and supplier.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.


See also:	Selection Controls


.topic 42
Sales Report:	Monthly Nett Sales


	Purpose:
Overview of monthly sales per title (per department or supplier).

	Parameters:
Sort-order, Year, Month and (if not sorted by quantity) nominated suppliers or departments.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Sales-quantity, Cost of sales, Nett sales, RRP, On-hand and YTD Sales.
Subtotalled by either supplier or department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the selection parameters.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 41
Sales Report:	Title-Quantities Sold Monthly


	Purpose:
Summarise sale-quantities by month (by department or supplier).

	Parameters:
Sort-order, Cutoff quantity, Month and (if not sorted by quantity) nominated suppliers or departments.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author,  On-hand, Last Sale-date, 12 columns of monthly sales quantities plus one totalling column.
Subtotalled either by supplier or by department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  	-	reflects the selection parameters.
SortOrder		-	determines sort-order.
Cutoff		-	the lowest level of sales to include in the report.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 54
Sales Report:	Best-Sellers


	Purpose:
Provides filterable grouping of best sellers.

	Parameters:
Start and finish dates, Number of top-sellers to include, Sort-options, Subtotalling options and Include/exclude lists for all departments, categories and bindings.

	Output:
Title, Author, Binding, Imprint and Quantity.
Subtotals as nominated.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle    -	reflects the report's purpose.
Subtitle	   -	reflects the report's date-range.
nSubGroup    -	subtotalling criterion.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 52
Sales Report:	Department


	Purpose:
	        Summarise departmental sales and profits.

	Parameters:
Start and finish dates plus department(s) to include.

	Output:
Department, departmental Sales/Profit percentages, Nett Sales & Cost, Gross Profit.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the report's purpose.


See also:	Selection Controls

.topic 53
Sales Report:	Imprint


	Purpose:
Report sales by imprint.

	Parameters:
Imprint(s) to include.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Oh-hand, On-order, Minimum stock and YTD sales.
Subtotalled by imprint.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the report's purpose.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 57
Sales Report:	Lifetime


	Purpose:
Longrange sales-figures.

	Parameters:
Number of years to cover plus department or supplier on which to focus.

	Output:
Title, ISBN, Sell-Price, Lifetime Profit and Sales, a column for each year covered, YTD, On-hand and On-order.
Subtotals by supplier and by imprint (if nominated).


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the report's purpose.
nCW		-	width of variable columns.
Col<n>		-	column header (for each of the variable columns).
C2<n>		-	2nd line of column header (each variable column).

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 55
Sales Report:	Marketing


	Purpose:
View performance by each of the marketing groups.

	Parameters:
Summarisation option, Start/finish dates and option to report quantities or values (latter not in summary).

	Output:
		Detail Option:
ISBN, Title, Columns for each marketing group, plus "unknowns" and totalling.   Subtotals by department.
	Summary Option:
	        Type, Sales, Discount, Cost, %-Contribution (by Type).

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the report's purpose.
nColWidth	-	adjusts report with regard to unneeded columns.
nDecWidth	-	dictates if certain numeric values are represented as integers.
nTitlePadLen	-	adjusts report title centering.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 163
Sales Report:	Operator Sales

Purpose:
Report on cash sales by operator, within a nominated date-range.

Parameters:
Date range.

Output:
Operator, Number of Sales, Retail value of sales, Average sale value.

Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle    -     records the date range.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 158
Sales Report:	Quotations


	Purpose:
Reprint a quotation.

	Parameters:
Quotation Number (optionally first narrowing the range by Customer).

	Output:
Customer, Quotation-number, Validity-date, ISBN, Title, Quantity, Sell-price and Extended price.

	    Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	       CustName    -	Customer's name.
	       dValid	-	The date to which the quotation remains in force.
	       nQTNo	-	The selected Quotation number.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 125
Sales Report:	Reprint  Invoice/Credit Range	
			Command-line execution enabled.
	Purpose:
Print (a range of) invoice(s) which have already been posted.

	Parameters:
Low and high invoice-references in range (leaving low reference blank will print just one invoice).
	        Option to bypass the print-preview.

	Command-line Parameters:	
	        /INV_REP    /<WantPreview>    /<StartingInvoiceNo>    /<LastInvoiceNo>

	INV_REP		-	Identifies the report to be run.
	WantPreview		-	/Y gives a preview, /N avoids it, /? will let the user choose.
	StartingInvoiceNo	-	Low (or only) invoice-number in range to be printed.
	LastInvoiceNo	-	May be omitted to print only one invoice, else last in range.

	Output:
Conventional invoicing details.

See also:	Selection Controls,  Executing Report Writer From The Command Line,


.topic 56
Sales Report:	Supplier


	Purpose:
Sales overview in selectable periods with imprints focus.

	Parameters:
From/To Periods, Subtotal-by-Imprint option, Report No-Sales option, Supplier(s) Selection.

	Output:
Title, ISBN, Cost, On-hand, On-order, MTD Sales, MTD Value and YTD.
Subtotals by supplier and by imprint (if nominated).


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects the report's purpose.
Subtitle		-	expresses the reporting period.
lPrintNoSales	-	dictates whether report's second section is included.
lImprintSubs	-	controls the level of subtotalling.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 2130
Sales Report:	Vouchers

Purpose:
List vouchers on file (either all or outstanding).

Parameters:
All or outstanding selection.

Output:
Voucher-number, Date, Amount, Face-value.

Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
lPrintAll         -        Determines whether all (or just outstanding) vouchers are printed.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 7
Creating And Modifying Your Own Reports

New reports can be created quite readily.   For an elementary exercise, try the following:   Select New from the File menu, then Standard from the submenu.   (At this point Report Writer's menus are replaced by the ReportPro Designer's.)

From the list of data tables, select BINDING.DBF.  You are then given a blank report-form.   Select the Text tool (from the Tools->Drawing Tools submenu) and define a text output area above the Header band, by clicking, dragging, then releasing the left mouse-button.  Type "BINDING CODES REPORT" into the box created.  This will be printed as the header on each page of the report.

The data from the BINDING.DBF table will be formatted in the Body segment/band of the form.  Select Field from the Tools->Drawing Tools submenu (or click the Field icon on the toolbar).  Drag/drop a field onto the "Page - Body" band of the form and the Expression Builder will pop up, to help you define what output you want.  Double-click on "Binding.Code" from the fields list, then OK.  Create a second output field for "Binding.Name", positioning it alongside the Code field.   The report is now ready to show you the Binding codes alongside the relevant descriptions.

HINT:	To move and resize the fields you have created, first select the Pointer as your Drawing Tool.

To run the report, you can use Print Preview from the Designer's File menu (or Open from Report Writer's File menu).

For more complex forms of data access you may wish to look at the report-forms for the inbuilt reports (which you can do by pressing the Modify button on the main selection window).

Reports worth making for yourself probably need access to the system data, i.e.: the data controlled by Bookscan.  ReportPro  (the system you use to create reports  -  or to redesign them), has been configured to grant that access by  default.

The system is quite complex and there are lots of file-and-field references required before certain classes of information can be extracted in a fully reliable fashion.   If you are determined to generate complex reports of your own, and looking over the internal reports doesn't  provide all of the answers that you need, you can always talk to the helpful and friendly support team from Barcode Solutions.



.topic 10
A report-form is an external (ReportPro) file containing the instructions concerning the placement and presentation of all data on any output page.  The file-name has a .rpt extension.  If you have the full ReportPro package you can edit the file simply by double-clicking on it from the Windows Explorer.  Otherwise you can load the ReportPro Designer through the options on Report Writer's File menu.

.topic 6
Modifying System Reports

To change a report, highlight it in the main selection window then click the Modify button.   Only one user at a time can modify any given report.

Before you see the normal "Parameters" window (if the report has one) you will be presented with some information about the effect that any changes will have and what  variables will be using the report-form's default settings.  (NOTE:  these defaults can be changed, to vary the preview's performance, without upsetting the runtime  which, itself, overrides these particular defaults.)

Report Writer generates data for the report, as usual.  This is so that you will be able to make modifications to the report-form without receiving messages about undefined data sources.   If it generates an empty file it will give a warning before loading the report form (an empty file will usually emasculate the Print Preview available within the Designer).

You can modify the data displayed in the report, the font(s) employed, column-orders, spacings, titles and almost anything else
"fixed" about the report.  Certain variables (other than the database values) can also be obtained by any report.    And you can easily add a picture if you need a report to include the corporate logo or somesuch.

If you use Print Preview (on the File menu, whilst modifying the report-form) do not take the output literally.  Although correct in most ways, it can be distorted by the report-form's Variables (which are not set to match the report data when in Modify mode).   Run the report as usual to get a true picture.

If you have saved changes to the report-form and later wish that you hadn't, look on the Report Writer's File menu for:  Restore Original Report Writer Report.

To see more about individual reports, their variables and output, make a selection below:

	Customer reports
	Departmental reports
	Supplier reports
	Purchasing reports
	Sales reports
	Creditor Reports
	Debtor Reports
	Title Reports
	Stocktake Reports
	Other reports

.topic 147
Stocktake Reports


	Select a report to view details of selection-options, purpose, output and variables:

	Overs		-	Report stocktaking "overs".
	Unders		-	Report stock shrinkage.
	Negative	-	Report stock with a negative "on-hand" record.
	Department	-	Report stocktake values by department.
	Totals		-	Stocktake totals in summary format.
	Stock List	-	Full stock listing of nominated scope.
	Stocktake List	-	Pricing and stock details from stocktake.
	Errors		-	Report stocktake counts outside a nominated range.
	Consignment	-	Report stocktake consignment quantities.

.topic 118
Stocktake Report:		Consignment


	Purpose:
	        Report stocktake consignment quantities.

	Parameters:
	         Coverage by (nominated) department, departmental group or all.

	Output:
	         Title, Author, Costings and Consignment quantity (subtotalled by Department) .

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle	-	Denotes the scope of the stocktake being reported.
	        lSubtotals   	-	Determines whether or not data is subtotalled.

	
See also:	Selection Controls.


.topic 113
Stocktake Report:		Department


	Purpose:
	        Report stocktake values by department.

	Parameters:
	         None.

	Output:
	         Department, Title-count, Item-count, Stock-valuation data,  Departmental percentage.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	       None.

.topic 112
Stocktake Report:		Negative


	Purpose:
	        Report stock with a negative "on-hand" count.

	Parameters:
	         Coverage by (nominated) department, departmental group or all.

	Output:
	         ISBN, Title, Author, On-hand.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        cSubTitle	-	Reflects the scope of the stocktake being reported.


	
See also:	Selection Controls.


.topic 110
Stocktake Report:		Overs


	Purpose:
	        Report counts which are over (during a stocktake).

	Parameters:
	         Include/exclude approvals.

	Output:
	         ISBN, Title, Author, On-hand, On approval, Stock count, Variation, Extended Valuations.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        cSubTitle	-	Reflects selection criteria and stocktake-type.
	        lSubtotals	-	Determines whether or not departmental subtotals will be printed.
	        lUnders	-	Determines purpose of the report.
	
See also:	Selection Controls.


.topic 117
Stocktake Report:		Stocktake-count Errors


	Purpose:
	        Report stocktake-counts outside a nominated range (trap data-entry errors).

	Parameters:
	         Maximum and minimum counts deemed acceptable.

	Output:
	         ISBN, Title, Author and Stocktake count (subtotalled by Department) .

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        None.


	
See also:	Selection Controls.


.topic 115
Stocktake Report:		Stock List


	Purpose:
	        Full stock listing across a nominated range of departments.

	Parameters:
	         Coverage by (nominated) department, departmental group or all.

	Output:
	         Title, Author, Discount, Sell prices, Cost prices, On-hand.  Departmental subtotals.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        ReportTitle	-	Denotes the scope of the stocktake being reported.
	        lSubTotals	-	Determines whether subtotals will be included.


	
See also:	Selection Controls.


.topic 116
Stocktake Report:		Stocktake List


	Purpose:
	        Full stock listing across a nominated range of departments.

	Parameters:
	         None.

	Output:
	         Title, Author, RRP pricings, Discount,  Cost pricings, Stocktake counts.
	         Subtotalled by department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	       None.


.topic 111
Stocktake Report:		Unders


	Purpose:
	        Report counts which are under (during a stocktake).

	Parameters:
	         Include/exclude approvals.

	Output:
	         ISBN, Title, Author, On-hand, On approval, Stock count, Variation, Extended Valuations.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        cSubTitle	-	Reflects selection criteria and stocktake-type.
	        lSubtotals	-	Determines whether or not departmental subtotals will be printed.
	        lUnders	-	Determines purpose of the report.
	
See also:	Selection Controls.


.topic 13
Supplier Reports

	Select a report below, to view details of selection-options, purpose, output and variables:


	Receipts		-	Reports receipts by supplier by month.
	Sales			-	Sales by supplier by month.
	Movements:
		Detailed	-	Stock movement by supplier.
		Summarised	-	Stock movement by supplier (summary).
	Orders			-	Order totals by month by supplier.
	Weekly			-	Comparative weekly sales.
	Year-to-date Sales	-	Comparative YTD sales.

.topic 30
Supplier Report:  		Stock Movement Details


	Purpose:
Detail stock movements by supplier and movement type.

	Parameters:
None

	Output:
Stock movement type, 12 columns of monthly totals plus a totalling column.
Subtotalled by movement type.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  -	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary	-	determines the level of detail reported.
cType	- 	determines what sort of transactions the report will display.
lMovement  -	determines if the report is concerned with stock movements generally.
lOrders	-	determines if the report is focussing on orders.
lAbs	-	formats certain output either with or without sign  (+ or -).


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 31
Supplier Report:  		Stock Movement Summary


	Purpose:
Summarise stock movements by supplier and movement type.

	Parameters:
None

	Output:
Stock movement type, 12 columns of monthly totals plus a totalling column.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  -	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary	-	determines the level of detail reported.
cType	- 	determines what sort of transactions the report will display.
lMovement  -	determines if the report is concerned with stock movements generally.
lOrders	-	determines if the report is focussing on orders.
lAbs	-	formats certain output either with or without sign  (+ or -).


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 32
Supplier Report:  		Orders


	Purpose:
	        Report orders by supplier.

	Parameters:
None

	Output:
Supplier name, 12 columns of monthly orders' totals plus a totalling column.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  -	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary	-	determines the level of detail reported.
cType	- 	determines what sort of transactions the report will display.
lMovement  -	determines if the report is concerned with stock movements generally.
lOrders	-	determines if the report is focussing on orders.
lAbs	-	formats certain output either with or without sign  (+ or -).


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 28
Supplier Report:  		Receipts


	Purpose:
Group receipts by supplier (by month).

	Parameters:
None.

	Output:
Supplier name, Stock movement type, 12 columns of monthly totals plus a totalling column.
Subtotalled by supplier.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  -	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary	-	determines the level of detail reported.
cType	- 	determines what sort of transactions the report will display.
lMovement  -	determines if the report is concerned with stock movements generally.
lOrders	-	determines if the report is focussing on orders.
lAbs	-	instructs certain output to be presented either with or without sign  (+ or -).


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 29
Supplier Report:  		Sales


	Purpose:
Group sales by supplier (by month).

	Parameters:
None

	Output:
Stock movement type, 12 columns of monthly totals plus a totalling column.
Subtotalled by supplier.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  -	reflects the selection parameters.
Summary	-	determines the level of detail reported.
cType	- 	determines what sort of transactions the report will display.
lMovement  -	determines if the report is concerned with stock movements generally.
lOrders	-	determines if the report is focussing on orders.
lAbs	-	formats certain output either with or without sign  (+ or -).


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 33
Supplier Report:  		Weekly


	Purpose:
	        Compare up to nineteen weeks of sales by supplier (across current and prior year).

	Parameters:
Starting week.

	Output:
Supplier name, 19 columns -  each reflecting one week of sales.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle	-	reflects the selection parameters.
cStartWeek	-	determines labelling of columns.
cLastYear	-	first year of the comparison.
cThisYear	-	second year of the comparison.
lByDept	-	indicates whether the report was run by Supplier or by Department.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 34
Supplier Report:  		Year-To-Date Sales


	Purpose:
Compare sales and costs by supplier in two years.

	Parameters:
Year 1, Year 2 and ISO Week (up to which to report).

	Output:
Supplier name, columns for each year's Sales, Costs and ratios.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  -	reflects the selection parameters.
cYear1	-	first year of the comparison.
cYear2	-	second year of the comparison.
lByDept	-	indicates whether the report was run by Supplier or by Department.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 146
Title Reports


	Select a report to view details of selection-options, purpose, output and variables:

	Supplier 			-	Reports all titles for (nominated) supplier(s).
	Author				-	All titles by author.
	Title				-	All titles in alphabetical order.
	Category			-	All titles from nominated categories.
	Department			-	All titles in (nominated) department(s)	
	Imprint				-	Report titles by imprints.
	Status				-	Report titles by status.
	Hotlist				-	Performance of hotlist titles.
	On Hold			-	All or nominated titles on hold.
	On Order			-	Customers with nominated title on order.
	Buyers				-	Purchasers of a specific title.
	Sales				-	Reports all sales.
	Valuation
		All			-	Values all on-hand stock
		Departments (all)	-	Values all stock by department
		Department (single)	-	Values stock for selected department
		Supplier		-	Values nominated supplier's stock
		Errors			-	Reports values outside nominated ranges
		Aged Stock		-	Identify (and/or mark down prices on) non-selling stock.

.topic 59
Title Report:			Author


	Purpose:
View title details  (by author).

	Parameters:
Report Type, Specific Type, Sort Order, Range of Authors to Include (or All).

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Imprint, Dept; Supplier, Binding, Invoice Cost, Sell Price and Year of Publication.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 		-	reflects selected parameters.
Subtitle		-	reflects further selection criteria.
HasSubGroups	-	determines whether or not group headings are shown.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 68
Title Report:			Buyers


	Purpose:
View/contact buyers.

	Parameters:
Start/Finish Dates,  Particular Title/ISBN.

	Output:
Customer Contact Info, Quantity and Order Date.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 		-	reflects selected parameters.
Subtitle		-	reflects selected parameters.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 60
Title Report:			By Title


	Purpose:
View title details (optionally of sales) by title.

	Parameters:
Report Type, Specific Type, Sort Order, Range of Titles to Include (or All).

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Imprint, Dept; Supplier, Binding, Invoice Cost, Sell Price and Year of Publication.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 		-	reflects selected parameters.
Subtitle		-	reflects further selection criteria.
HasSubGroups	-	determines whether or not group headings are shown.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 61
Title Report:			Category


	Purpose:
View title details (optionally of sales) by category.

	Parameters:
Report Type, Specific Type, Sort Order, Categories to Include.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Imprint, Dept; Supplier, Binding, Invoice Cost, Sell Price and Year of Publication.
Subtotals by category.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 		-	reflects selected parameters.
Subtitle		-	reflects further selection criteria.
HasSubGroups	-	determines whether or not group headings are shown.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 62
Title Report:			Department


	Purpose:
View title details (optionally of sales) by department.

	Parameters:
Report Type, Specific Type, Sort Order, On-hand Cutoff, Department(s) to Include.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Imprint, Dept; Supplier, Binding, Invoice Cost, Sell Price and Year of Publication.
Subtotals by department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 		-	reflects selected parameters.
Subtitle		-	reflects further selection criteria.
HasSubGroups	-	determines whether or not group headings are shown.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 65
Title Report:			Hotlist


	Purpose:
Review weekly sales of hotlist titles.

	Parameters:
Select between single-store and consolidated listings.

	Output:
Store-name, 15 weeks of sales figures plus a totalling column.
Subtotals by store.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects selected parameters.
Col1Head	-	reflects selected parameters.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 63
Title Report:			Imprint


	Purpose:
View title details (by imprint).

	Parameters:
Report Type, Specific Type, Sort Order,  Imprint(s) to Include.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Imprint, Dept; Supplier, Binding, Invoice Cost, Sell Price and Year of Publication.
Subtotals by department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 		-	reflects selected parameters.
Subtitle		-	reflects further selection criteria.
HasSubGroups	-	determines whether or not group headings are shown.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 66
Title Report:			On Hold


	Purpose:
Review title(s) on hold.

	Parameters:
Minimum On-hold Duration to report, Particular Title/ISBN (or All).

	Output:
Customer ID, Order Date, Quantity.
Subtotals by ISBN.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 		-	reflects selected parameters.
Subtitle		-	reflects selected parameters.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 67
Title Report:			On Order


	Purpose:
Review title(s) on order.

	Parameters:
Particular Title/ISBN.

	Output:
Customer Contact information.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle	-	reflects selected parameters.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 69
Title Report:			Sales


	Purpose:
View brief figures (on sales and returns) by title.

	Parameters:
None.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Total Sales, Total Invoiced, Discounted Price, Returns, Discounted Returns.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 	-	reflects purpose of report.

.topic 64
Title Report:			Status


	Purpose:
View title details (by status).

	Parameters:
Report Type, Specific Type, Sort Order,  Statuses to Include.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Imprint, Dept; Supplier, Binding, Invoice Cost, Sell Price and Year of Publication.
Subtotals by department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 		-	reflects selected parameters.
Subtitle		-	reflects further selection criteria.
HasSubGroups	-	determines whether or not group headings are shown.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 58
Title Report:			Supplier


	Purpose:
View title details (optionally of sales) by supplier.

	Parameters:
Report Type, Specific Type, Sort Order, Exclude Out-of-stock option, Supplier(s) to Include.

	Output:
ISBN, Title, Author, Imprint, Dept; Supplier, Binding, Invoice Cost, Sell Price and Year of Publication.
Subtotals by supplier.


	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle  	-	reflects whether report is for internal or external consumption.
Subtitle		-	reflects further selection criteria.
HasSubGroups	-	determines whether or not group headings are shown.


See also:	Selection Controls

.topic 148
Valuation Report:		All


	Purpose:
	       Reports the value of all on-hand stock.

	Parameters:
	       None.

	Output:
	        Title & Item counts, Stock value at: Last & Average costs, Sell & R.r.p; Approval values, Average cost.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 		-	fixed as "Stock Valuation".

.topic 156
Valuation Report:		Aged Stock

	Purpose:
To vet stock that is on-hand and hasn't sold.  Optionally marks down cost and/or sell prices.

	Parameters:
	        Sort-option, start and finish dates.  This report can also mark down sell and/or cost prices.

	Output:
	        ISBN, Title, Last receipt date, Onhand, Cost and Sell prices with extended values + mark-downs.
	        Sort by supplier or department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	        Subtitle		-	Reports any mark-down values employed.
	        lBySupplier	-	Sort-order flag.
	        CostMarkRate	-	The mark-down rate used against Cost price.
                        SellMarkRate	-	Mark-down rate for Sell price.
	        dStart		-	The earliest date for the report. (See next.)
	        dEnd		-	The latest  date for the report.  The report assumes that all stock on-hand 						was received on the master-file's (single) record of last date received.

See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 150
Valuation Report:		Department (single)


	Purpose:
Value all stock on-hand for a nominated department with the optional inclusion of all departments which are consolidated with it.  Department codes are consolidated in sharing their first character.

	Parameters:
	        Department, option to consolidate.

	Output:
	        Title & Item counts, Stock value at: Last & Average costs, Sell & R.r.p; Approval values, Average cost.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 		-	reflects selection.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 149
Valuation Report:		Departments (all)


	Purpose:
Value all stock on-hand and report by department and/or consolidated department.

	Parameters:
	        Omit consolidation option. Department codes are consolidated in sharing their first character.

	Output:
	         Dept, No. of Titles & Items, Value at: Last & Average costs, Sell & R.r.p; Departmental percentage of stock.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	         None.

.topic 152
Valuation Report:		Errors


	Purpose:
Locate data errors which can affect stock valuation reports.

	Parameters:
	        Cutoffs (acceptable values) for cost-price, sell-price, on-hand and margin.

	Output:
	        ISBN, Title, Author, Sell-price, Discount, Cost, Count.  Sorted by department.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
None.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 151
Valuation Report:		Supplier


	Purpose:
Value all stock on-hand for a nominated supplier.

	Parameters:
	        Supplier.

	Output:
	        Title & Item counts, Stock value at: Last & Average costs, Sell & R.r.p; Approval values, Average cost.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle 		-	reflects selection.


See also:	Selection Controls.

.topic 2140

Prerequisites
·	Internet access at each location. Either by dial-up or direct connection via ADSL, Cable, Wide-Area Network, etc.
·	A dedicated email address for each site location. These email addresses will be used purely for the transfer of multi-store data and must be separate from the email addresses used for email correspondence.
·	Made up codes (typically non-book product) have to standardized across all locations.
·	2 character store (or location) codes allocated to each store and defined at all locations. This is important for the Bookscan configuration steps 2 and 5.
Central Accounts and Central Rewards. All locations, Head Office and Branches, will require a common Customer file to run Central Accounts. For stores starting from scratch, this is implemented seamlessly. For stores already running separate Customer databases, steps will have to be taken to unify a common Customer file across all locations. Once implemented, this will update as new customers are added.


Configuration
From the main menu of Bookscan click on e_Comms.

(If you get the error please edit the transfer setup information or  data path is invalid, just click on OK.)
The following will be displayed.



Setup

 When in e-Comms to run setup on the main menu click File then click Setup;
This screen is split into 5 tabs as shown in the images below.
	

General tab

The Bookscan path must be set to the location of your data files.
The Transfer Interval is displayed in the form hh:mm:ss and will determine how long e-Comms waits after the last completed transfer before running again.  Set it to 00:00:00 if you want to run on demand.
Disabling Transfers Incoming will allow the e-Comms transfer to send data only if it will not try to pick up any detail from the email account.
Disabling Transfers Outgoing will stop any email being sent and will allow Bookscan to pick up details only.
The Activity Log, if checked, will record the activity log to a text file. The text file, called actlog.txt, is located in the Logs folder in the database shown in Bookscan Path.
To view the log file, click the View Log File button.  (This may take a long time to open if the log file is very large.)
 Pressing Start in Task Bar will automatically minimise e-Comms to the taskbar when it is started.




Connection tab

The Dial Up Networking Entry (obsolete & ghosted)
The Dial Up user name (obsolete & ghosted)
The Dial Up password (obsolete & ghosted)
The SMTP Server is the SMTP server name of your ISP (Defaults to mail.bigpond.com)
The POP3 Server is POP3 server name of your ISP (Defaults to mail.bigpond.com)
The Direct Connection (obsolete & ghosted)



Web Orders tab
This tab is only to be used for stores wishing to transfer between sites using the email method (old). The new transmission method FTP and Local network is contained on the EDI tab. Please refer to that for it setup. If using FTP/Local network options, ensure this tab's fields (Multi Store) stays blank.

Account: Email address used for web site registration & admin login.
Password: Web site admin password
Web URL: web site sub-domain. (The first part of the whole address.  Leave out the e-web.com.au)
e-Web Site ID: This can be copied from the website admin via Site Settings / API integration
Jacket FTP User ID: Obsolete, leave empty.
Jacket FTP password: Obsolete, leave empty.
Check for web orders: Optional, used to have e-Comms automatically check for & download web orders.




Sales Export tab
Used if you are sending data to Nielsen Book Scan.

Nielsen Bookscan: Export Settings
FTP Server is the FTP internet address where you will be connecting to send the Bookscan data.
Username is the account ID that has been supplied from Nielsen Bookscan.
The Password is for the Username, also supplied from Nielsen Bookscan.
Enable Nielsen Bookscan is to be ticked if you wish to enable this to be used.

Master onhand export: settings
FTP / None: Select FTP if you wish to export your onhand figures to an FTP server.
FTP Server:  FTP server address
Username:  FTP server username
Password:  FTP server password


E.D.I. tab
Interstore Communication via:
This is for businesses with multiple sites wishing to communicate with each other (sending stock transfers, product information etc). There are the 3 methods that can be selected:
Local network : Type in Folder Path or browse (yellow icon) to select the shared folder that all sites can see. This folder location is where both sites will be placing and retrieving their files from.
FTP : When selected, then fill in the FTP server address, Username and Password for access to that server. The FTP server must be the same for all sites.
None: No interstore communication.


Note: When using FTP and local network method you need to make sure you have full read/write access to these locations.
Note: When FTP and local network methods run the first time, they create folders in these locations for each of the stores, using their short store code as the folders name.



Pacstream FTP Settings:
FTP settings are used for sending Pacstream data
FTP Server is the address of the Pacstream FTP server
Username is the username supplier by Pacstream
Password is the password supplied by Pacstream.
Store EDI Email Address is the email address that all email will display in the From field, also see section on configuring Customers and Suppliers for e-mail communications.
It is also the email that will be replied to by Pacstream.




eWeb tab
This information is for usage of those who have Barcode Solutions: php  selected in System Options / Modules tab.
(Obsolete export sysem, no longer supported.)

FTP Server is the address of the FTP server where your website is being hosted.
Username is the username for connecting to your FTP server.
Password is the password for your FTP account.
Export Directory is the location on the FTP server that the files need to be saved to. This is where the website will load files from.
Image Directory is the location on the FTP server that the images need to be saved to. This is where the website will load images from.
Web Encryption Key is for if your website has uses encryption and requires a key.





When all the tabs have been completed click OK button.



.topic 2150

1. Sending data on a daily basis
On the main e-Comms screen click File then click Transfer.
Now click Start button , to start sending data.
It will now send data all requested data to the required locations including: -

·	Email and EDI transaction advices to Customers and Suppliers.
·	Inter-store data.
·	Synchronisation's request resends.
·	Nielsen Bookscan.

If you set a time in the Transfer Interval during configuration, you will see it counting down, (00:29:55 in the image below.).  You can still run it manually by clicking Start, if you so choose.
 See below,


2. Synchronise
Click on File then click Synchronise.
Here you can synchronise Titles Customers, Stock level, Title Categories, and Customer Categories between participating stores.
Each store must do this to ensure the databases are in unison

See below,

3. Request Resend
Click on File then click Request Resend.
The request resend function allows you request information from a particular store.

See below,


·	Stock transfers
      If you select Stock Transfer you a have to enter the Transfer Number you are requesting.
      At the bottom of the window you will need to fill in the Branch Code field for the store you are transferring to.

·    Store Sales History
      This will send the store sales history to National office (Paper Plus only)

·    Store Sale transactions
      This will send a consolidated sales history for use at National office (Paper Plus only)

·     History and transactions
       A combination of the above (Paper Plus only)




.topic 2160

Problem:
When installing on a Window NT workstation you will get the following error.
The application or DLL *:\plusscan\bsa\bs5\disk1\cain4shll.dll is not a valid Windows NT image
Or
Unable to load cain4shl.dll. Desktop objects and icons may not be set up.
Please check against your installation diskette
Answer:
Ignore the error and continue with the installation. E-COMMS will install successfully.


Problem:
Dynamic memory low error.
Answer:
This is caused when a large file is in the mailbox. Remove the large file and try again.


Problem:
e-Comms caused an invalid page fault in module cavoole.dll
Answer:
This is caused when a large file is in the mailbox. Remove the large file and try again.


Problem:
Unable to send transfers time out error.
Answer:
Go to e-Comms \ File \ Setup and disable incoming
Try again.
Go to e-Comms \ File \ Setup and disable outgoing
Doing this will give you and indication of where the problem lies.
It will also prove that e-Comms communications works and the problem is with a file.

You can also rename the <database folder>\transfer directory to Transfer.old and then start e-Comms while you are on line. OK the error port already in use and e-Comms will automatically set up the transfer directory again.
Get the customer to dial again and e-Comms will now connect.
Or
Make sure the SMTP and POP3 settings are correct


Problem:
e-Comms does not appear to start after installation.
Answer:
Another copy of e-Comms is already running, check the task bar.  If not found, go to Start - Run.  Type in Taskmgr & click OK.  Go to the Processes tab & look for e-comms.exe.  If it is there, select it & click End Process.




.topic 2170

In e-Comms click on File, then click Setup. (To open e-Comms while in Bookscan click on e-Comms on the main menu)
Next click on the EDI tab.
Enter your e-mail address in the Store EDI Email Address field.
This will allow the recipient of system generated e-mails to identify you as the sender.
e-Comms will automatically dispatch advices according to Customer and Supplier setup.



In Bookscan on the main click on Tables, then click Customer Master.
Select a Customer Master record and open the Address tab.
Enter Customer Email address as shown below.



To save the changes click the Save button.


Then click on the Finance tab.
Then click on the EDI box.
For  Wholesale users enter in the EDI number in the EDI field. This is the EDI number given to your customers so you can identify them from one another when they reply to you through EDI.



To save the changes click the Save button.


.topic 2180

On the main menu of Bookscan click on Tables, then click Supplier Master.
Select the supplier you are setting up and open the Address tab.
Click on the Edit button to enable 'edit mode'.

EDI - Pacstream
Enter PACSTREAM in the EDI field.
In the SAN field enter in the number given to you by your supplier.



Then click Save button once the changes have been made.

EDI - Email
Enter EMAIL in the EDI field.
In the SAN field enter in the number given to you by your supplier, (if any).



Then click Save button once the changes have been made.

.topic 8


ABN:
37684378701
	

Delivery address:
81-83 Campbell St
Surry Hills, NSW, 2010


Mailing address
PO Box 691
Parrammatta CBD, 2124
NSW, Australia


Ph:      +61 2 8999 1195
Aus Only:    1300 766 905
Email: support@bookscan.com.au
Website: http://bookscan.com.au

.topic 143
Command Window

Command Windows can be opened from the Report Writer's File menu (first selection) or by clicking on the leftmost toolbar button.  The Command Window gives you access to all reports, as well as means of organising its list.
It opens by default when you open the report Writer from the Bookscan menu Reports / Reports.



The left-most pane of the window contains an entry for each report in the system (these can be system reports or ones that you have created yourself: custom reports).  The right half of the window contains a number of displays and buttons.  The upmost control contains Notes concerning the report.  You can edit these to your liking.   Beneath the Notes display there can appear a record of how long the report last took to run (not shown).  Beneath that is a checkbox by which previewing can be switched on or off.  The next checkbox allows deleted reports to be viewed in the list (allowing them to be undeleted).  And beneath that come the push-buttons, described below:

Run  		-  Runs the selected report.
More Info  	-  Shows the Help on the selected report.
Rename  	-  Allows you to rename the report.
Modify  		-  Loads the report form into the ReportPro Designer.
Up In List  	-  Moves the report up in the master list.
Down In List  	-  Moves the report down in the master list.
Create  		-  Allows you to add a new report to the master list.
Remove  	-  Remove the report from the master list, or recall deleted reports.
Close		-  Closes the command window.

.topic 126
Executing Report Writer From The Command Line

Certain reports can be obtained from Report Writer programatically (e.g.: from a batch-file).   This enables Bookscan users to take "single-click" advantage of Report Writer's superior report-presentation whilst continuing to enjoy the benefits of a POS system running under Windows.  The command-line structure uses the following conventions:

   < x:PathToProgram >\Report Writer.EXE   \<ReportIdentifier>  \<Parameter1>  \<Parameter2>  \<Etc.>

Omit the angled brackets from the actual command line.  And only supply the parameters that a particular report (see links below) requires.   Values within the angled brackets are place-holders for  values which must be specified in order to run any particular report.   The reports able to be run by these means include:	Reprint  Invoices,	Transfer Reprint,	Special Orders By Customer,	Special Order (Particular),     Purchase Order Number.


.topic 119
Customer Account Utilities

Customer account terms
To globally change the customer terms in the customer master, go to the Customer account terms area:
Select the "from" terms e.g. 14 days.
Select the "to" terms e.g. 30 days.
Click on the Update Terms button. In the above example all accounts with terms of 14 days will be updated to 30 days.

Customer account type change
If you are changing accounts from open item to balance brought forward,  or the other way around, and there are outstanding transactions on the accounts, then you will need to run this routine to update the existing account transactions.

WARNING: These routines are not completely reversible -  so if you change your mind you may have lost some of your data.  Please contact Barcode Solutions before proceeding. You should also backup your files.
WARNING: Do not change the account type on the customer master. This routine will reverse whatever the account type setting is there.

In the Customer account type area, use the radio buttons to select whether to globally change all accounts or to just change a single customer.
In the case of a single customer, select the customer from the combo box.
Click on the Update Account button.

Effects of this routine:
Open item to balance brought forward:
The customer account type will be changed to balance brought forward.
Transactions older than 30 days will be moved to the history file. In debtors will only see the current transactions.

Balance brought forward to open item:
The customer account type will be changed to open item.
Transactions older than 30 days will be totaled for each of 30, 60 and 90 days and a  journal added to the account for each of these (where they are non-zero). You will now be able to allocate payments and credits against these debit journals.

Customer Account Recovery
If the customer account type has been changed and there were outstanding transactions on the account and the above routine was not run, then running month end will cause the account to display anomalous figures. This routine will repair those figures and re-calculate the current, 30, 60 and 90 day figures. If figures are correct then the routine will have no effect.
Backup of your files.
In the Customer Account Correction area, just click on the Recovery button.
When asked if you wish to proceed, click Yes button.
If there are any discrepancies for any customers a window will display with the current, 30, 60 and 90 day figures and the correct figures for each in error only.
To fix, click Repair button

 Supplier Account Updates

Supplier account type change
If you are changing supplier accounts from open item to balance brought forward,  or the other way around, and there are outstanding transactions on the accounts, then you will need to run this routine to update the existing account transactions.

WARNING: These routines are not completely reversible -  so if you change your mind you may have lost some of your data.  Please contact Barcode Solutions before proceeding. You should also backup your files.
WARNING: Do not change the account type on the supplier master. This routine will reverse whatever the account type setting is there.
setting is in the supplier master.

In the Supplier account type area, use the radio buttons to select whether to globally change all accounts or to just change a single supplier.
In the case of a single supplier, select the supplier from the combo box.
Click on the Update Account button.

Effects of this routine:
Open item to balance brought forward:
The supplier account type will be changed to balance brought forward.
Transactions older than 30 days will be moved to the history file. In creditors will only see the current transactions.

Balance brought forward to open item:
The supplier account type will be changed to open item.
Transactions older than 30 days will be totaled for each of 30, 60 and 90 days and a  journal added to the account for each of these (where they are non-zero). You will now be able to allocate payments and credits against these debit journals.

Supplier recovery
The supplier recovery repairs open item supplier accounts that have errors in them. If figures are correct then the routine will have no effect.
Backup of your files.
In the Supplier Account Correction area, click on the Recovery button.
When asked if you wish to proceed, click Yes button.
If there are any discrepancies for any supplier, a window will display with the current, 30, 60 and 90 day figures and the correct figures for each in error.
To fix, click Repair button


.topic 201
This feature of Invoice Entry enables you to quickly invoice all special orders for all customers where stock has been received.
The process loads in turn, into the header, each customer who has special orders where the stock has been received.
The special order lines for the first customer are automatically copied into the browser. You can then finalise the order in the usual way by clicking on the Finalise button. The invoice will then be created and the next customer and their special orders are loaded. Use the Skip button to skip processing any customer.

Processing Details
Header window
·	In the Invoice Entry window ensure that you have not selected a customer and that the Transaction Type is set to Standard Invoice.
·	Click on the Start Batch Alt F8 button to begin processing.
·	The number of customers to be processed and the total number of special order lines will be displayed.
·	The first customer with special orders will be loaded.
·	Make any changes you require in the header (e.g. re-set the terms ) and click on the Save F12 button.

Browser Window
·	The browser showing that customer's special orders will now be displayed.
·	Amend or delete any lines you need to and add further lines to the invoice if required.
·	Click on the Finalise F12 button.

Footer window
·	Make any changes or additions you require to the footer window (e.g. add a freight charge) and click on the Post F12 button to create the invoice.
·	The next customer will now be loaded and you can process their orders in the same way.
·	To skip a customer click on the Skip Customer Alt F9 button; the next customer will be loaded in its place.
·	Add any time you can use the End Batch F8 button to stop processing.
·	When the last customer with available special orders is finished, batch mode will end automatically.



.topic 175
Handling small orders
The cost of freight and invoice handling can make small orders uneconomic. To overcome this, Bookscan offers the following features to allow users to trap small orders and hold them until further orders have been received. As further orders are received from a customer, or as their backorders are released, the system checks the total value of the customer's order and when the values moves above the minimum, removes them from being on hold, allowing them to be processed.
Orders held this way can be monitored and controlled in the Picking window and can be manually taken off hold and if required, either a surcharge or a freight charge added.

System Options
On the Sales tab there is a Surcharge As combo box with three choices:
1.	None
Set this option if you wish not to use the minimum order features.
2.	Small order surcharge
Select this option to hold  orders that are below the minimum value or to apply a small order surcharge if they are to be released. If using this option, enter the Small Order Surcharge amount and Minimum Order Value in the fields below the combo box. For example you may set a standard surcharge of $7.00 on all orders below $60.00.
3.	Hold order below minimum
Select this option to hold  orders below the minimum value but not use the small order surcharge features. If using this option, enter Minimum Order Value in the field below the combo box.
Also on this tab the Consolidate Pick Slips checkbox should be checked to allow the automatic linking of customers' picking slips..

Invoice Entry
The following features will only apply if you have selected either option 2 or 3 above.

Current order summary
After you have saved the header information and ISBN/Catalogue field becomes visible, a summary of the customers current orders is shown in the In Picking box. The information shown is for all this customer's unprinted orders for that are waiting to be processed. This items shown are:
	In picking	The value of all unprinted picking slips for this customer.
	Freight total	The total value of the freight charged on these pick slips.
	Surcharges	The total value of surcharges on these pick slips.
	Backorders	The total value of backorders for this customer.
This allows the operator to make decisions on charging freight or adding a surcharge.

Surcharges
Option 2
If you have selected option 2 for small order surcharges, you can add the surcharge by clicking on the Surcharge button. This is a toggle button. Clicking the button the:
	1st time	Adds the small order surcharge to Surcharge field
	2nd time	Sets the Surcharge field to zero and marks the order as Waive surcharge.
	3rd time	Removes the Waive surcharge Flag.
Orders flagged as waive surcharge will not be held if they are below the minimum.

Option 3
If you have chosen option 3 (hold orders below minimum), you can use this button to mark/unmark the order as Not to be held. Again orders that as so marked are not be held if they are below the minimum order value.

Posting orders
When posting orders the system takes into account the customer's current orders that are waiting to be processed when checking for orders below the minimum order value. If the value of the current order plus the customer's orders already in the system is below the minimum, a warning will be given to the operator that the order will be held, allowing the operator the option to return to the order entry screen to edit the order or to continue with posting the order.
If the current order brings the total value of orders for this customer above the minimum then the held flag will be automatically removed from all their current orders allowing the picking slips to be printed  and the orders despatched. This is the principal advantage of this system - that releasing the orders is fully automated.
If the current order brings the total value of orders for this customer above the minimum and a surcharge has already been applied to any of the orders, the operator will be given the option to have the surcharges removed automatically (option 2 only.)

If the Consolidate Pick Slips option has been selected, then when posting,  the current order will be automatically linked with the customer's orders already in the system.

Picking Window
The following features will only apply if you have selected either option 2 or 3 above.
There is now a Held column in the Picking window. This is checked for orders which are flagged as held because they are below the minimum order level. Picking slips flagged as held cannot be printed.

Taking orders off hold
Held orders are automatically taken off hold when other picking slips for customer are created, or backorders are released,  to bring the total value of the orders above the minimum order value.  To take an order off  hold manually, double click on the checkbox in the Hold column. If you have selected option 2 (for small order surcharges) you will be given the option of adding the small order surcharge. If you have selected option 2 and no freight has been charged, you will be given the option of adding a freight charge.

Held Lines
There is now a button to show only held orders. This is a toggle button; clicking it the:
	1st time		Shows only held orders.
	2nd time		Shows all lines except held lines.
	3rd time		Shows both held and unheld lines.

Display mailorder customers
You can now display only mailorder customers. Right click in the browser to display the context menu and select one of the three options:
	Mailorder only	Shows only mailorder customers.
	Exclude mailorder	Shows only debtor customers	
	Show all		Shows both mailorder and debtor customers
Mailorder customers are now shown with a yellow  background in the browser.

Improved linking
When authorising a payment in the picking window or applying a payment for a mailorder customer, the order will now automatically be linked the customer's other orders. At the same time a check is done to see whether any Held flags can be removed.


Backorder Release
New window
There is a new window for backorder releases with the following features:
It has a browser for displaying backorders. There are three methods of filtering the browser display:
·	All backorders
· 	By customer – display only backorders for the customer selected in the Customer field.
·	By product – display only backorders for the product selected in the Product field.

Sorting the browser
Where all backorders are displayed, you can change the sort order by clicking on the appropriate column header.
	Pick # or date column		Sort chronologically
	Cust key or customer		Sort in customer key order
	Product code or Title		Sort by product code

Releasing backorders
Backorders are released by clicking on the Release (F12) button. Backorders will only be released for those lines displayed in the browser.
·	So if you have displayed backorders only for a particular customer, then only that customer's backorders will be released.
·	Similarly if you are showing only backorders for a certain product then clicking on the Release button will release backorders only for that product.
· 	If All Backorders is selected then a full backorder release will be done.

Holding backorders
To prevent a backorder from releasing, you can set it to held by double clicking its checkbox in the Held column. To remove the flag double click on the check box again.
To hold all displayed lines, right click to display the context menu and select Hold All.
To remove the Held flag on all lines in the browser, click on the Remove Held button.
To remove the Held flag on all lines, not just those in the browser, check the Remove all Held checkbox and then click on the Remove Held button.
An example: you want to release a single line for a customer.
	Move the cursor to the Customer field and enter the customer key.
	Right click on the browser and select Hold All
	Double click on the Held checkbox of the line you want to release
	Click on the Release (F12)  button

Linking
If the Consolidate Pick Slips option in System Options has been selected, released backorders will be automatically  linked to any unprinted picking slips for that customer.
If the total value of these orders is below the minimum order value, the released order will be flagged as "Held."
If the released order brings the total value of the customer's current orders to above the minimum, then all the held flags will be automatically removed and the customers orders will be available for despatch..

Backorder reports
There are now three backorder reports that can be run from this window and from Bookscan Reports. These are:
	All Backorders ( sorted by either date, customer or product code).
	For a single customer.
	For a single product code.
To run the reports, select either the customer or the product to display them in the browser and then click on the Print (F11) button.
For all backorders, select the All Backorders option. If required change the sort order by clicking on the appropriate column header ( as outlined above). Then click on the Print (F11) button.

Handling backorders where there is insufficient stock
Where there is insufficient stock to cover all backorders for a certain product, you can limit the maximum quantity to be allocated to each order.
Select the product in the product field and then enter the maximum quantity you want allocated any order. Then click on the Release (F12) button.


.topic 127
POS:    A computerised retailing system linked to the point of sale  -  usually through a barcode-scanning device (rather than a mouse-centric user interface).   Bookscan, available from Barcode Solutions in a Windows format, is an example.



.topic 21
From within the report designer a preview of the report can be obtained from the File menu.  If the report contains variables whose values are reset when the report-proper is run, you can emulate the consequences simply by editing the default value stored in the report form.  This should not have any effect on runtime output.

Caution: 	 If you modify the default of a  variable which is 0 (zero) then you may upset totalling calculations.



.topic 174
Parking is done automatically when you start receiving and deleted when you save your session to List.
Pressing the Recall Parked button will bring up the following dialog.



This dialog will list the available invoices for each supplier that have been parked. Highlight the invoice you want to recall and press
the Select button to load the parked receiving session back into the receiving window. Now you can continue were you left off from.
If you want to start again you can delete a parked session using the Delete button.
If there are a built up amount of parked sessions that are all, you can click on the 'Delete All' button, which will clear all lines.
When you start receiving if you enter a supplier and invoice number that have been parked then this session will
automatically load into the receiving window, without having to press thee Recall Parked button (From the main receiving window)


.topic 9
		
    ReportProTM


                  DataPro Inc.
                P.O. Box 6663
           Warner Robins, Ga
                  31095-6663

.topic 70
Selection Controls

In choosing the parameters for a report you will be using fairly standard Windows controls  -  checkboxes, radio-buttons, combo-lists and edit-lines.   A couple of spare observations may be of benefit...

Where lists are presented in an open (rather than a drop-down / combo) fashion you can usually make multiple selections, simply by mouse-clicking on multiple items.  Click a second time to deselect an item.  A button captioned "Select All" accompanies each multiple selection list and performs as you'd expect.  If you use it, then the functional caption changes to "Deselect All",  minimising your need to issue instructions.

Where date-input is availed, the edit control is post fixed by a button which opens a calendar control (wherefrom the full selection can be made by double-clicking on a date).   Various means of navigation are provided within the calendar control.  In the edit control, one component of the date is highlighted at a time.  The plus and minus keys increment/decrement the selected component.  The arrow keys select the next component (day, month or year).  Experiment with all of the selection controls.  They're the bulk of the interface!

Some of the edit-controls accept a partial value (e.g.: a partial title for the Titles On Hold report) and Report Writer will retrieve the remainder of the information as part of validating the parameters (in this case you'll need to click the OK button a second time in order to launch the report).  Report Writer generally performs validation as soon as you click the OK button (to run the report).  Read warning messages fully and you won't ever get stuck for long!

.topic 79
Simple Reports:		Single-Table Lists


	Purpose:
List content of a simple table (e.g.: the master list of  departments or of categories).

	Parameters:
None.

	Output:
Code, Description.
	         A record-count is added at the end of the report.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
ReportTitle	  	-	Names the table being viewed.

.topic 161
Simple Reports:		Promotions

	Purpose:
 List all promotions.

	Parameters:
None.

	Output:
	         Code, Name, Start Date, Finish Date, Order Start Date, Order Finish Date.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	          Standard only.

.topic 166
Standard Variables

Report Writer often sets a value (that is stored within the report form) at runtime.  The name of the variable can have been anything, and "ReportTitle" is one that we have often used.  By using it, we enabled the report form to produce a variable "title", depending on settings selected for the report.

The "standard variables" are sent to all reports, even though some forms don't use them.  But you can incorporate them into any report by creating a variable of the designated name within the form (by modifying the report


The standard variables which you can employ in this manner are:

NAME			PURPOSE

"Licensee"  		-	to include your company's registered name.
"TaxName"		-	the name of the sales tax you endure (e.g.: GST).
"GSTRate"		-	the tax rate set for your installation.
"CurrencySign"	-	your system's currency symbol (e.g.: $).
"ISBN_DESC"	-	what your system uses the ISBN field for (typically: ISBN).
"AUTH_DESC"	-	what "author" stands for on your system (e.g.: is "Artist" on DiscScan systems).
"IMPR_DESC"	-	how your system uses the Imprint field (e.g.: "Label" on DiscScan systems).

Note: These values are not set when you are modifying a report.  Default values are used in that case.

.topic 114
Stocktake Report:		Totals


	Purpose:
	        Report stocktake totals in summary format.

	Parameters:
	         None.

	Output:
	         Title-count, Item-count (with Pre-stocktake), Approvals, Stock-valuation data.

	Report-form Variables reset at runtime:
	       None.

.topic 1345

This window allows you to set the number of copies you will print of each document and set some other system defaults, as listed below.


Special orders
Set the number of copies that will print for each of the following reports:
·	Deletion advice: The docket printed when a special order is cancelled.
·	Advice notes: The slips with customer special order details printed during receiving.
·	Customer letters: If the customer master has the Special Order Letters box checked, letters to the customer (instead of Advice Notes) will be produced during the receiving of special orders.
·	Dockets: The number of dockets to print out when the special order is taken.

Other settings are:
·	Group by customer: When ticked, the setting causes advice notes and customer letters to print in customer. This is useful if you are posting them as the multiple slips for a single customer can be easily collated to go in the same envelope. When unticked, the slips will be grouped by item.  This makes it easier to match the slips with titles.
·	Special labels: Special order letters and slips print when the good received note is printed during the receiving process. Selecting this option will also cause the program also to print a (barcode-type) label with the customers name and phone number to stick on arriving special order stock.
·	Min stock to zero: This will set the minimum stock level to zero after a special order has been received. Use this if you want to ensure that no special ordered items go into draft purchase orders.

Invoicing
Her you can set the number of copies of invoices and credit notes to print from the Order Entry window.

Other settings are:
·	Default sort order:  Determines the order which titles are display on the invoices and credit notes.
·	Auto backorder: When checked, the system automatically generates a special order for a customer when there is insufficient stock to fill a line on an invoice.

Laybys
Set the number of copies that will print for layby dockets, layby deletion advice dockets and layby payment receipts.

Other settings are:
Days to complete: Set the number of days you allow for a layby to be completed. If you have layby condition printing on your docket, the time allowed will be included.

Other forms
Set the number of copies that will print for:
Returns Authorisations.
Debtor payments	
Purchase orders
Credit Claims
EFTPOS dockets
Items on hold: Set the number of dockets to print for items on hold.

	       Return to System Options Summary

.topic 1336

In this window, you can set the numbering sequences for your documents:
·	Picking slips
·	Special orders
·	Laybys
·	Invoices and credit notes
·	Returns
·	Carton numbers
·	Sales transactions
·	Consignment advice notes
·	Approvals
·	Transfers
·	Receipts
·	Returns authorisations
·	Tickets
·	Quotations
·	Rewards vouchers: ensure that this sequence does not conflict with you tracked voucher sequences.
·	Journals

The numbers displayed are the last numbers used.
To change the sequence, just overtype the number. Using the same numbers twice for the same counter can cause issues, so avoid duplicating numbers.


	     Return to System Options Summary

.topic 1335

In this window you can set a variety of financial defaults.

·	Financial year starts: Select the month that starts your financial year.

·	Name of sales tax: Select either GST or VAT.

·	Tax rate: Enter the GST or VAT rate (E.g. Enter 10 for a 10% tax).

·	Layby deposit: Sets the default minimum layby deposit.

·	Period length: Set the number of days over which you wish to report sales and purchases summaries. This is usually 7 days.

·	Default transaction types: Set the default transaction type for the Cash Sales, Order Entry and Debtors Payments.

·	Default terms: Set the default terms for customer accounts e.g. 30 days.

·	Currency: Set this field to your local currency. The currency's symbol (e.g. $) will be displayed.

·	Local currency invoicing: Set this to invoice overseas clients in their local currency.

·	Local currency in creditors: Set this to use overseas suppliers local currency.

·	Account Exports settings: These settings are explained in the chapter on exporting accounts to MYOB.

	    Return to System Options Summary

.topic 1344

IIn these windows you can set up the Bookscan modules for which you have licenses.
Contact Barcode Solutions to arrange to purchase any extra modules.


Note that the checkboxes for the modules (such as Creditors, Debtors or Marketing) display which modules are licensed. You cannot turn on or off a module in these windows. The checkboxes and other fields for the various module options can be edited.

Accounts modules
There are two types of accounts supported by Bookscan for both creditors and debtors. They are:
·	Open item accounting
Open item accounting retains all transactions on the account until they are paid. At the next ageing, they are then moved to the history file. Payments are applied against specific invoices. Unpaid or part paid items remain on the account until cleared.

·	Balance brought forward
Balance brought forward accounts show only the account balance for anything older than the current month's transactions.
The complete history can be obtained only from previous statements.
Barcode Solutions strongly recommend the use of Open Item accounting as this retains the details of each transaction until cleared.

Creditors options
Balance brought forward credit: Here you can select the default account type that will be displayed when adding a new supplier to the supplier master.
Auto post GRN: With this option selected, supplier receipts are added to the creditor file when posting into stock. If not set, supplier invoices will need to be manually added in the Creditors window.

Debtors options
Open items debtors: See the Balance BF credit in Creditors above.

Account Export
This module allows you to export all or part of your Bookscan accounts directly into MYOB.

Web Site (Please contact Barcode Solutions for further information.)
Web:  Select the typre of web site you are using.
e-Web Drop Ship Allowed: Allows the e-Web order to be drop shipped.
Path for Bookscan Large images: Set the path to the location where large images are stored.
WINSCP session name:  The name of the WINSCP session created for exporting images to the web site.
Generate WINSCP script:  Generates a script to call WINSCP to export the images.  Can be used to run the image export as a scheduled task in Windows.

Marketing
This module allows you to report your sales against your promotional material (source) and/or against where your customers live (location).
To turn off reporting by source, tick the Disable Source checkbox. To turn off reporting by location, tick the Disable Location checkbox. If you wish, use the combo boxes to set defaults.

Other options
·	Multiple types per sale: Check this box if you wish to know the location and the source for each item, not each transaction.
·	Force Selection: Check this box if you wish to enforce the selection of the marketing options (by default in cash sales and invoicing, you can click 'Cancel' when it prompts for a selection).

Other modules
Distributor/publisher: This option gives users access to the warehousing functions. Picking slips can be created in the Order Entry window. There are special windows to control your picking operations, a back order control window and a scan pack despatch window for packing your orders. There is also an automated returns authorisation area to control customer return requests. The returns policy for this module is set on the Options tab window.
Promotions:  This module allows you to set special pricing for selected products for a period of time.
Academic: Assists in the purchasing for books for universities and colleges.
Consignments inwards: Allows you receive products on consignment from suppliers. The module fully automates the tracking of you consignment sales and allows you to report sales, returns, shrinkage etc back to you suppliers.
Consignments out: Allows you to consign stock to your customers. It operates in a similar way to approvals but has more invoicing and control options.
Security: This option allows you to restrict user access to the various parts of Bookscan.



Distributor/publisher:
Returns policy:
You can set up your customer returns policy here. You allow some items to be sold as "sale or return" and others with stricter return conditions (or no returns).
You can also set a default expiry time for returns authorisations.

Other settings
Coles Myer: Bookscan is Coles/Myer electronic delivery compliant. If you wish to set this up please contact Barcode solutions.
Don't use picking slips: Using the checkbox, you can choose not to use the picking and packing features and just invoice your customers.
Bin locations: This option allows you to auto-allocate warehouse bin locations as new products are received. It also enables the warehouse mapping functionality.

Rewards cards
Rewards cards defaults can be set up here. See the rewards card section for details.

Pre-pack
The Pre-pack module is used to assist in selling to primary and secondary schools. Contact Barcode Solutions if you are interested in this module.

 	         Return to System Options Summary

See also
	Marketing - type setup

.topic 1343

Here you can set the defaults for the purchasing screens.


·	Purchase order number sequences: Displays the last-used purchase order number for each of the PO sequences. You can add a sequence or edit the sequence names. You can have up to 5 order number sequences.
WARNING: Please ensure that the sequences do not overlap.

·	Never print barcodes: Turn off barcode printing.	

·	Always print barcodes: When posting your received stock, always print a barcode label.

·	Use catalogue number for ordering: With this flag set, the catalogue number, where available, will be used in place of ISBNs on purchase orders and in the purchasing windows.

·	Don't use minimum stock for reordering: This flag causes the program to use the sales quantity method of re-ordering instead on the minimum stock method. See the Draft PO chapter for details.

·	Stock adjustment supplier: To enable you to view a history of stock adjustments, stock adjustments are posted against a dummy supplier. Create the stock adjustment supplier (usually supplier code STK, supplier name Stock Adjustment) in the Supplier Master. Then select this supplier in the combo box here.

·	Order quantity depends on: Select whether the program uses the on hand or the available stock level when decided when to add a product to draft purchase.

·	Sort draft PO by: Here you can set the default sort products in the draft purchase orders browser by either author or title.

·	Copies to print: You can set the number of copies to be printed for finalised purchase orders and credit claims.

·	Show special comments in editing draft PO:  Display the special order comments in the draft purchase order screen.

·	Preview report of finalised purchase orders: Sets by-passing the print preview as the default when finalising purchase orders.

Auto-hold all draft orders: Put new draft orders on hold

	     Return to System Options Summary

.topic 1341
This window has various system options which you can set.

 	

First column
·	Hold special orders:  If you tick this checkbox, all new special orders are automatically put On Hold. So if you have 4 copies of an item and 3 are for special orders, the on-hand quantity will be 4 and the quantity available will be 1.This will affect when products appear on the purchase order draft. If your re-ordering is dependent on quantity available (set on the Purchasing tab), this box should be checked. If it depends on the on-hand quantity, leave it unchecked.

·	Always pop up Holds: Checking this box will cause the Holds window to always pop up whenever a copy of a title that has holds on it, is scanned into a sale. (Normally it will pop up when there is insufficient stock to cover the sale and the stock on hold).

·	Credit note to backorder: When you check this box credit notes are added to the incoming list. This allows special orders to be allocated against the returned stock.

(If using this option you will need to set up a supplier with supplier code "!C/N").

·	Redirect customer billing: This flag allows customers to be set up with sub-accounts.

·	Allow cash out at point of sale: If you allow EFTPOS cash out at your registers, tick this box.

·	Split register takings: If you check this box the X Report run at end of day will subtotal for each register. This allows for separate balancing of cash at each terminal.

·	Sales against kit components: When selling kits, the sale can be recorded either against the kit or against the kit's component products.
·	Prompt for operator initials: When logging in, prompt the operator for their initials and password.

·	Net Price Override Flag: When the Allow Invoice Net Price Override box is ticked, users in invoice entry can change the price of or add a line discount to net priced items. The items will still be unaffected by header discounts. The option is useful for wholesale/retail operations where you want to prevent discounts on retail sales via cash sales but invoice at a trade price as a wholesaler.

·	Instant Rewards: Tick the box to use rewards at the point of sales.  Select from the list of rewards programs for the program you wish to use.  In the example above, the "Valued Customer" program has been selected.

·	Always pop up Ins.Rew.: Will cause a pop up window to appear in the cash sales window notifying of the current reward "points" or the dollar value the customer can use if they have passed the threshold set in the reward program.

Second column
·	Don't track categories of purchases: Turns off the tracking of customer purchases by category.

·	Retain invoice comments as default: When you check this box if you enter a comment when creating an invoice, that comment will appear as the default on subsequent invoices created in that session.

·	Default to singles in POS: When you tick this box, the default entry in the POS window will be for sales of a single quantity per line.

·	No discount if below margin: This flag will stop discounting in the order entry window and in the POS where the margin on a sale line is below the minimum margin set in the next field.

·	Minimum invoice sales margin: Set a minimum invoice margin. In invoice entry, where a title's margin is below this minimum, the user will be prompted before saving the line. This is used to prevent incorrectly priced items being invoiced.

·	Surcharge as: Select the small order option you wish to enable- none, hold order below a minimum value or small order surcharge.

·	Minimum purchase value: Set a minimum value for invoices to avoid being classed as a small order.

·	Small order surcharge: Set the default small order surcharge amount for invoice orders under the minimum purchase value.

·	Payments discretionary adjustment: This field is useful for invoicing of mail orders, where customers send in payments with their orders. If the payment amount is slightly below the actual invoice total, you may wish to accept the payment amount as full payment. Here you can set a default amount for an acceptable payment difference (e.g. 50 cents) at which the system will process a short payment as full payment.

Third column
·	Consolidate daily sales: If you are using department groups, checking this box will give group subtotals on the Daily Sales Report.
Departments in a group all have same initial letter in their department code.
E.g. you might have eight book departments starting with B (BCH, BHE etc) and three stationery departments that start with S (SGE etc). With this box checked, The Daily Sales Report will show subtotals on Books and Stationery.

·	Consolidate picking slips: To enable the consolidating of multiple picking slips onto the one Invoice. This is for Warehousing users.

·	Invoice on docket: Causes invoices created in the POS window to be printed on the docket printer rather than the standard printer.

·	Split store taking: The cash book report will group sales by store areas. The store area is defined by the first letter of each register's name. For example if you have five registers in two areas you could set the registers as Kid1, Kid2, Kid3, Adult1, and Adult2. The cash book would split taking in two groups – 'K" and "A".

·	Enable handling charges: This setting can be used for library suppliers who want to charge customers handling on each order line. Setting this flag will enable the Handling filed in the Order Entry window.

·	Round down cents: Normally over the counter sales totals are rounded to the nearest five or ten cents. Check this box to always round totals down. This field also affects the calculator. With this box checked, it will paste rounded down figures into a field.

·	Round to: Set your country's rounding to 5 or 10 cents.

·	Hold order with backorders: Setting this flag will cause orders in the Order Entry window which are only partially filled to be held until the order is complete.

·	Tender amount exclude backorders: When processing payments in the Order Entry window on order that are only partially filled, you have the choice of taking payment for the whole order including backorders or just that part of the order which can be filled now. The flag sets which of these options will be used as the default in the Tendering window.


	     Return to System Options Summary

.topic 1338

This window allows you to set various system options and allows you to access purchasing budget figures.


Subsidy Module
This module is used for those who have items that can be subsidised, such as government rebate text books, or even used for staff discounts.
This module can only be used if activated by Barcode Solutions.
For information on setting up the Subsidy module and using it, click the link.

Other settings
·	Enquiry key length: This field determines how many characters the title master field is indexed on. The usual number is 25.

·	Lines per page on pre-printed invoice forms: This field determines how many lines will be printed per page on invoice forms.

·	Customer key length: Set the length of the alpha part of the customer key. It is usually set to 5. The maximum is 8.

·	No Auto Numbering for customer key: As customer keys are created, the program adds a number (usually three digits) to the end of the alpha section of key –which is usually the customer's surname. So when creating your 53rd customer called Smith, the customer key becomes SMITH053. Setting this flag turns this auto-numbering off.

·	Shopper key must be unique: When creating a new customer, the shopper key is checked for uniqueness.

·	Bookscan style address: This legacy setting can be ignored by almost all users.  (This legacy setting can be ignored by almost all users.)

·	Browse with lines separating rows: Display lines between rows of the title, customer and supplier masters.

·	Legacy account exports: This legacy setting can be ignored by almost all users.

·	Academic with Semesters: Used by universities that use semesters for their courses.

Budgets
If you are using the purchasing budget option, you can set the budget figures here. Click on the Open to Buy Budgets button. For details click on the link.

	      Return to System Options Summary

.topic 2330




.topic 1342

The docket and label printing options are displayed here. When printing reports and forms in Bookscan, the Windows default printer is used. However for barcode labels, dockets, tickets and carton labels, Bookscan prints direct to the printer, bypassing Windows. On this tab, Bookscan is configured to print to these printers.

Barcode label (L1) & Barcode label (L1)
In these two fields, you can set lines to print out at the bottom of each barcode label. Usually the company name is entered on the first line. Note that there may not be sufficient room for the second line on smaller labels.	

Docket head line 1 & Docket head line 2
2 lines that will print at the top of the docket.  Usually store name and suburb or town.

Docket Greeting
Farewell that is printed on the bottom of the docket.

Print ISBN on docket
The ISBN (code) of items will print on the sales docket underneath the Title.

Don't display customer addresses
This checkbox is used to suppress the printing of customer addresses on sales dockets.

Terms & conditions
Sales
You can create a text file listing your sales terms and conditions e.g. your refund policy. This will print on your cash sales docket just before the docket footer.

Layby
You can also create another text file to replace the default layby conditions with your own conditions. To use this text file in place of the default terms, uncheck the Use Default check box. The text files can be as long as you want.

To create a terms & conditions text file:
·	Select either the Sales Docket or Layby Docket radio button.
·	Click on the Add Line (F6) button. The Line field will be enabled and cursor will move there.
·	Enter the first line of your text file (e.g. REFUND POLICY) and click the Save Line (F6) button.
·	Keep typing and saving each line. Press the Escape (Esc) key when finished.

To edit a file:
·	Click on the line you want to edit. The line will be displayed in the Line field.
·	Click on the Edit Line (F5) button. The Line field will be enabled and cursor will move there.
·	Type you changes and click the Save Line (F6) button.

For layby terms, you can click on the Copy Default (F4) button (only visible if no layby terms have been entered). The default terms will be copied into the text box where you can edit them before saving them as your own terms.

                  Return to System Options Summary

.topic 1339

In this window you can set up the defaults for your Title Master.

·	Compulsory title master fields: Choose fields in the Title Master that are to be compulsory during data entry – imprints, binding, status or category.
·	Minimum stock: Sets the default which will appear during data entry. This is usually set to 1. It is advisable not to set it to 0 as that setting prevents the title appearing in the purchase order draft.
·	Review locked records after: Determines how long (in seconds) a title record can be open in edit mode before you are prompted to release the lock on the title.
·	Default active status: Set one of your statuses to be the standard status for a current product.
·	Available stock definition: Define how you want Available stock to be defined.
·	Costs Price: Select the definition of the cost price that you will use- either latest cost price or average cost price. Stock valuations will not be affected as these report both average and last cost prices.
·	Next dummy ISBN: If you wish to use dummy ISBNs (or EANs) for products without barcodes, you can set the sequence here. For example: if you set the sequence here as 0000254856695, then, when you add a new title you can click the Next (Alt F2) to load the next number in the sequence. The number stored in this window is then incremented to the next valid, unused number.

If you enter an ISBN (i.e. 13 digits starting 978 or 979) then the last (check) digit will be re-calculated to ensure it is a valid ISBN. So you don't need to know the check digit for your dummy ISBN. Just guess it, and let the program calculate it for you. For example if you enter 9780000100000 as your first dummy code the program will save it as 9780000100009, changing the last digit from 0 to 9.
·	Use Illustrator field: Setting this flag will allow you to record the illustrator of a book in the title master.
·	Firm sale: This refers to whether stock is supplied to you as "sale or return" or as a "firm sale". It sets the default which will appear during data entry. Set it to whichever is more common for your stock.
·	Binding groups: This flag is for use primarily by music wholesalers. It allows you to set each binding type as either Books or Music. When creating invoices and pick slips, the program will report a separate line and total quantity for both binding groups. Once the flag is set, open the Maintain Binding window (Tables/Authority Tables/Binding) to set up your groups.
·	Imprint matrix: Setting this flag will allow you to set up a discount percentage by imprint for customer groups. For example, customers in customer group G could be set to receive a 10% discount on all title with an ABC imprint. Once the flag is set, open the Maintain Imprints window (Tables/Imprint Master) to set up your discounts.  Using the imprint matrix precludes you from using the standard pricing matrix.	
·	Web searches: Set up your user names and passwords for downloading titles from web sites. The products supported are TitlePage, Nielsen Bookfind, Bowker Web Services and Bowker Search Link
·	Author/Illustrator in upper case: Forces these fields to upper case.
·	Always lift the re-price flag in receiving: Also on the Title Master is a flag to remove the re-price flag when stock is first received. In the first case outlined above (NYP titles), the re-price flag is removed but on the second (imported titles) it is not removed and the product is re-priced each time it is received into stock. The flag on this window merely sets the default "Lift re-price" flag on the New Title window.
·	Set re-price as default for new titles: In the distributor/publisher module, backordered products can be set to be re-priced as stock is received. A re-price flag is set on these titles in the Title Master. This is used for titles not yet published, so that you can take orders before a retail price has been set and also for imported title where the price to be set will depend on the exchange rate at the time stock is received. This flag sets the default for the Re-price flag in the New Title window.
·	Enable looseleaf in the Kits module: Bookscan can be configured to handle looseleaf products assembled from other products. Please contact Barcode Solutions if you are interested in setting up this feature.
·	No auto-link imprint/supplier: Stopps Bookscan from automatically loadin supplier information when a linked imprint is selected.


	     Return to System Options Summary

.topic 1346

This is where your business' details are set.

These fields will appear on your various forms and reports such as the invoice form.

Notes:
Town/Suburb
The Town/Suburb field should contain your postcode and, if you wish your state.

Address 2
Address 2 can be left blank.

Country
The Country field needs to be filled in the format "Australia", "New Zealand" or "Singapore". The content of this field has implications elsewhere in the program.

ABN (Australian users) or GST No (New Zealand users)
For Australian users this is your Australian Business Number.
For New Zealand users, it is your GST number.

SAN	
If you have a SAN (Standard Address Number) enter it in the SAN field.
Some users have 2 accounts with suppliers ordering on different SAN numbers. If you have a second SAN, enter it in the Alternate SAN fields.
SANs are used to uniquely identify businesses during electronic ordering and invoicing.

Store Code	
For multi-store set ups, use this field for the two character code for this store.
Branch codes are set up in Tables/ Authority Tables/ Branches.
If operating as a single store, you still need a code here.


Set System Options Password (Alt F9) button
System Options contains settings that should only be changed at management level. You can set a password to restrict access to the System Options window by clicking on this button.
If you have a license for the Security module, setting a password here is unnecessary.

Set Stock Adjust Password (Alt F8) button
You can set a password to restrict doing stock adjustments by clicking on this button.
If you have a license for the Security module, setting a password here is unnecessary.

Group store code
The field is for Angus & Robinson franchisees only. They should enter their A&R five digit store code. The code will be used for sending stock availability data to the A&R web site.

Bank Details
These fields are for banking details that will display on Invoices & end of month Statements to debtors so that clients can pay by Direct Deposit to your account.

 	    Return to System Options Summary

.topic 1337

IIf you have multiple stores, you can set up how they will interact here. Before setting up a multi-store network you should consult Barcode Solutions.
In a multi-store system, Bookscan's e-Comms program can be used to transfer stock, customer and title information between stores.


Multi-store setups
Synchronisation options
Share on-hand figures
Tick this box when using e-Comms to transfer stock figures between stores. The stock levels at other stores can be viewed on the Stocks tab of the Title Master.

Share title changes
If you wish to have the different branches share the changing of titles, check this box. As titles are added to the master or edited, e-Comms will update the title masters at the other stores.

Do not share new titles
If you are sharing title changes between branches but do not want new titles added, tick this box.

Transfer vouchers
Ticking this checkbox will allow you to have tracked gift vouchers used at all your stores. When new vouchers are sold or when they are redeemed (or partially redeemed), e-Comms will pass the data to your other stores.
Note that you will require unique voucher number sequences at each store.
It is strongly advised that you consult Barcode Solutions before setting up a multi-store voucher system.

Title synchronisation options
These checkboxes are used to prevent certain title master fields being updated when synchronising product information. If you select "No abstracts" or "No blurbs/reviews", the data from those fields will not be dispatched to other stores. If the data has been sent by other stores, it will be ignored.
Ticking the other checkboxes ("No prices" etc) will only cause e-Comms to ignore the relevant data sent from other stores. It will still send that data. So you will need to set these options at each store.

Head office set ups
These options are only to be used if you are using central debtors and/or central rewards. In any other multi-store set up they should be left unticked.
It is strongly advised that you consult Barcode Solutions before setting up a multi-store head office system.

Centralised debtors
The setting allows for a head office to control all the debtors for the group. e-Comms is then used to transfer sales history from branch stores to the head office.

Centralised rewards
The setting allows for a head office to control all the customer rewards for the group. e-Comms is then used to transfer sales history from branch stores to the head office.

Installation is head office
Tick this box if this branch is the head office.

Installation has a head office
If another branch acts as a head office, check this box. Then select the head office store code from the drop-down box.

Customer synchronisation
Select the appropriate level of customer synchronisation you require. If you select customer synchronisation, you will first need to append the two character store code to the end of each customer code. There is an option to do this in e-Comms. It is strongly advised that you consult Barcode Solutions before setting Customer synchronisation.

Nielson Bookscan
If you wish to be involved with anonymously sending title sales to Nielson Bookscan for statistical purposes, tick this.
(For book trade only)
Check the options to disable, uncheck to enable.

	        Return to System Options Summary

.topic 187

Adding a new course

Click on the Add Course (F3) button.
In the Code field enter a new course code (up to 10 characters). Note that this field must be unique.
Then fill in the other fields as outlined below:
Course	Course name ( up to 30 characters) . Compulsory field.
Optional fields
Year	The 2 digit year of the course e.g. for 2010 enter 10.
Faculty	10 characters
Department	10 characters
Comments 	Two lines of 50 characters.
Co-ordinators	25 characters
Email	Faculty email ( email and phone numbers for individual lecturers are stored elsewhere).
Phone	Faculty phone number
Terms 1 - 4	Terms (or semesters) that  the course is taught in.
Summer Term (5) If there is a summer term for the course it is stored as term 5.
		
Click on the Save Changes (F12) button so save your changes or Cancel Changes ( use the Escape key) to discard them.
To edit course details, click on the Edit Course (F4) button.	
Note that text in these fields are coloured blue when you are adding or editing them.

Entering historical details
When the course is being set up, you may enter as much historical information as you prefer.
From that point forward, each time the course information is rolled over, the existing data will move one column to the right.
To enter this data manually, click on the Edit Rolls button and type in the numbers to the appropriate fields.
These fields are:
Estimated	The estimate of the number of students taking the course
Pre-enrol	The  the number of students who have pre-enrolled.
March 	If you are using a yearly roll, this is the actual number of students taking the first semester.
July	If you are using a yearly roll, this is the actual number of students taking the second semester.







.topic 122
Adding Pictures To A Report

Once your report has been loaded into the report-designer, select Drawing Tools (from the Tools menu).  Continue the menu-selection with Picture.  Drag out a suitably-sized rectangle onto the report, using this tool, and when you release the mouse-button you will be presented with a dialogue enabling you to identify the picture's sort and whereabouts.  The currently accepted picture-file formats are:  BMP, PCX, PNG, JPG and TGA

More details are available within ReportPro's Help, under "Drawing Tools".


